Dedication
Dedicated to Caitlin, Andrew, and Eloise—without your love and support, this book would not have
been possible. I would like to thank my mom, my dad, Andy, Pam, Leah, Tiffany, Thapasvi, Sarah,
and Bella. A special thank you to Michal Strawn for her invaluable help. I am grateful to all the
support from my publisher, especially Jennifer Goodenough and Angela Tartaro.

Thanks so much to all of my students over the years—I have learned far more from you than you
have learned from me.
SAT® and Bluebook™ are trademarks registered and/or owned by the College Board, which is not
affiliated with Barron’s and was not involved in the production of, and does not endorse, this product.
© Copyright 2023 by Kaplan North America, LLC, d/b/a Barron’s Educational Series All rights
reserved under International and Pan-American Copyright Conventions. By payment of the required
fees, you have been granted the non-exclusive, non-transferable right to access and read the text of
this eBook on screen. No part of this text may be reproduced, transmitted, downloaded, decompiled,
reverse engineered, or stored in or introduced into any information storage and retrieval system, in
any form or by any means, whether electronic or mechanical, now known or hereinafter invented,
without the express written permission of the publisher.
Published by Kaplan North America, LLC, d/b/a Barron’s Educational Series



1515 W Cypress Creek Road
Fort Lauderdale, FL 33309
www.barronseduc.com

ISBN: 978-1-5062-8753-9
About the Author
Brian W. Stewart is the founder and president of BWS Education
Consulting, Inc., a boutique tutoring and test preparation company based in
Columbus, Ohio. Brian is a nationally recognized test preparation expert,
having over 30,000 hours of direct instructional experience with a wide
variety of learners from all over the world. He has achieved a perfect score
on the SAT, helped hundreds of students reach their college admissions
goals, and presented on best tutoring practices at national conferences.

Brian has used his experience and expertise to write several best-selling
books with Barron’s, including Barron’s ACT and Barron’s Digital
PSAT/NMSQT. He is a former high school teacher and graduate of
Princeton University (A.B.) and The Ohio State University (M.Ed.).

Brian resides in Columbus with his wife, two children, and an assortment of
pets.

To learn more about Brian’s online tutoring and group presentations, please
visit www.bwseducationconsulting.com.
Table of Contents
  How to Use This Book


      PART 1: INTRODUCTION TO THE DIGITAL SAT

Welcome to the Digital SAT
 Overview
 Frequently Asked Questions
 Important Features of the Digital SAT User Interface
 General SAT Test-Taking Strategies
 Managing Test Anxiety
 Preparing for the Test


                        PART 2: DIAGNOSTIC TEST

Diagnostic Test
 Overview
 Section 1, Module 1: Reading and Writing
 Section 1, Module 2: Reading and Writing
 Section 2, Module 1: Math
 Section 2, Module 2: Math
 Answer Key
 Digital SAT Scoring Chart
 Test Analysis
 Answer Explanations
                                 PART 3: READING

Reading for the Digital SAT
 Overview of the SAT Reading Modules
 General SAT Reading Strategies
 Words in Context
 Structure and Purpose
 Cross-Text Connections
 Central Ideas and Details
 Quantitative Evidence
 Quantitative Evidence Question
 Textual Evidence
 Inferences
 Additional Practice Exercises
 Vocabulary Resources


                                 PART 4: WRITING

Writing for the Digital SAT
 Introduction and Strategies
 Grammar Review
 Additional Practice Exercises
 Advanced Practice


                                  PART 5: MATH

Math for the Digital SAT
 Introduction and Strategies
 Algebra
 Advanced Math
 Problem Solving and Data Analysis
 Geometry and Trigonometry
 Advanced Drills
                 PART 6: PRACTICE TESTS 1 AND 2

Practice Test 1
 Section 1, Module 1: Reading and Writing
 Section 1, Module 2, Reading and Writing
 Section 2, Module 1: Math
 Section 2, Module 2: Math
 Answer Key
 Digital SAT Scoring Chart
 Answer Explanations

Practice Test 2
 Section 1, Module 1: Reading and Writing
 Section 1, Module 2, Reading and Writing
 Section 2, Module 1: Math
 Section 2, Module 2: Math
 Answer Key
 Digital SAT Scoring Chart
 Answer Explanations


             PART 7: PRACTICE TEST 3: ADAPTIVE

Practice Test 3: Adaptive
 Section 1, Module 1: Reading and Writing
 Answer Key
 Section 1, Module 2A: Reading and Writing
 Section 1, Module 2B: Reading and Writing
 Section 2, Module 1: Math
 Answer Key
 Section 2, Module 2A: Math
 Section 2, Module 2B: Math
 Answer Key
 Adaptive Digital SAT Score Estimator
 Answer Explanations
How to Use This Book
This book is designed to allow for highly targeted preparation for the new
Digital SAT. Based on your previous official practice test scores or the
Diagnostic Test in this book, review the strategies and content knowledge
that are most relevant to your needs. There are hundreds of drills that range
in difficulty from easy to challenging so that you can achieve the very best
results for your personal situation.


Diagnostic Test
First, take the Diagnostic Test to gain an understanding of your strengths
and weaknesses. It is a complete test with answer explanations and a
question-type analysis guide so you know what types of concepts need the
most attention.


Review and Practice
The Reading, Writing, and Math sections each have:

     Proven test-taking strategies that allow you to customize your
     approach
     Extensive review of key concepts, particularly grammar and math
     knowledge
     Practice questions fully aligned with the new Digital SAT content
     Plenty of practice drills for ambitious students
Practice Tests
The final section of the book offers the opportunity to take three full-length
practice tests that include all question types found on the actual SAT for the
Reading and Writing and Math sections. The final practice test models the
section-adaptive format of the new Digital SAT. Comprehensive answer
explanations are provided for all questions. To maximize the material
available for practice, there is no overlap of questions in the different
adaptive modules.


Online Practice
In addition to the Diagnostic Test and three practice tests within this book,
there are also more than three tests’ worth of practice questions (300
questions) in the online drills. You can target your weak areas since the
drills are broken down by question type. All questions include answer
explanations. Our online resources also include explanations to the most
challenging official Digital SAT practice test questions.


For Students
Every strategy and explanation is based on what I have found works best
for students on the actual SAT. No matter your personal goals or
background knowledge, you will find practice drills and test-taking
strategies that are geared toward your situation. Look at the SAT as an
opportunity to showcase all of your knowledge and skills for colleges.


For Teachers
While many students will like working through this book independently,
others will maximize their learning when they have a great teacher or tutor
as their guide. Help your students work smarter instead of simply harder by
utilizing the concept reviews and drills most appropriate for your students’
needs. Also, you can coach your students on which test-taking strategies
will be the best fit based on their past performance. I am hopeful that the
skills students develop from using this book will help them not just with the
SAT, but also with their academic coursework and future careers. If you
have any suggestions for future editions, please reach out via the publisher.

                                                                  Sincerely,
                                                           Brian W. Stewart
                      PART 1
Introduction to the Digital SAT
Welcome to the Digital SAT

Overview
The SAT is a standardized test administered in a digital format designed to
assess your readiness for college-level work. Approximately 1,700,000
students take the exam each year, and most U.S. colleges and universities
accept it for admissions consideration. Many schools also use the SAT to
determine eligibility for scholarships. The SAT is one of many factors that
colleges use to grant admission, along with evaluations of high school
coursework, application essays, extracurricular involvement, and more.
Beginning in 2023 for international students and 2024 for U.S. students, the
SAT will be given in a digital, adaptive format. The longer paper-based
version of the SAT will be retired.

Frequently Asked Questions
What Does It Mean That the SAT Is an “Adaptive” Test?
So that the Digital SAT test can take around two hours instead of around
three hours, the SAT is now adaptive, meaning the test changes depending
on how the individual test-taker is doing. The second modules of both the
Reading and Writing section and the Math section will change in difficulty
based on how a student did on the first modules of each section. Students
who perform better on the first modules will have more challenging
questions in the second modules, while students who do not perform as well
will have easier questions in the second modules. If you move on to the
more difficult second module of a section, be mindful that the pacing could
be more challenging.

What Is the Format of the Digital SAT?
The Digital SAT takes a little over two hours to complete, and is broken
down as follows:

             SAT Module                                  Format
 Reading & Writing One                  32 Minutes, 27 Questions, Standard Difficulty
 Reading & Writing Two                  32 Minutes, 27 Questions, Adaptive Difficulty
                                        (easier or harder questions depending on how
                                        you did on the first Reading and Writing
                                        section)
                               Break–10 Minutes
 Math One                               35 Minutes, 22 Questions, Standard Difficulty
 Math Two                               35 Minutes, 22 Questions, Adaptive Difficulty
                                        (easier or harder questions depending on how
                                        you did on the first Math section)


How Is the Digital SAT Scored?
     The SAT score is broken up into two halves:
      Reading and Writing is scored from 200–800 points.
      Math is scored from 200–800 points.
     The total SAT score is therefore between 400 and 1600 points, with
     1600 being a perfect score and 1000 being approximately an average
     score.
      There is no penalty for guessing, so be sure to answer every question,
      including fill-in questions in the Math section.

How is the new Digital SAT different from the older paper-
based SAT?

                               Test Length
                Old SAT                                Digital SAT
            Old SAT                                       Digital SAT
About three hours long, including breaks        A little over two hours long; assesses the
and administration.                             same skills as the longer SAT by having an
65 minutes for Reading                          “adaptive” format.
                                                Less time needed for test administration
35 minutes Writing and Language
                                                because students can download the testing
25 minutes for Non-Calculator Math              app ahead of time.
55 minutes for Calculator Math


                                      Test Format
            Old SAT                                       Digital SAT
One test form for all students on a             Different test questions for different
particular test day                             students.
Paper test booklets with Scantron sheets        Taken on a laptop that students provide or
for answers                                     that the test center makes available.
Can go back to questions within a section       Can still go back and review questions.
before time is called                           Questions can be flagged.
Students should bring their own watches         Countdown clock and calculator built into
and calculators—they are not provided.          the program, although students can still
Can write on the test booklet                   bring a watch and calculator if they would
                                                like.
Experimental questions (ones that don’t
                                                Can write on provided scrap paper.
count towards your score), if given, are in a
section after the test.                         A few experimental questions are
                                                incorporated into each test section.


                           Reading and Writing
            Old SAT                                       Digital SAT
Reading passages are 500–750 words long         Reading and Writing texts are no longer
and have 10–11 questions each.                  than 150 words. Each text has just one
Reading genres include fiction, social          question accompanying it.
science, historical documents, and natural      Will have a greater variety of reading
science                                         genres represented. Along with the current
Writing and Language passages are about         SAT reading genres, there will be
                                                humanities, drama, and poetry excerpts.
450 words long and have 11 questions
each.
                                           Math
                 Old SAT                                    Digital SAT
     Non-Calculator and Calculator Sections       Calculator permitted throughout the test.
     Formula sheet provided at the beginning of   Formula sheet and digital calculator
     the test section.                            available in the program.
     Students need to bring their own             Word problems are typically more concise
     calculators.                                 than they currently are.


Why Is the College Board Making This Change to the SAT?
      Adaptive tests have a long track record of success. The GRE and
      GMAT, both of which are used for graduate school admissions, are
      computer-based adaptive assessments. These tests are shorter than
      they would otherwise be since they adjust the difficulty of the
      questions based on student performance.
      Students have become more comfortable with computer-based
      assessments. With so many students learning remotely during the
      pandemic, digital learning has become far more common.
      The test should be easier to administer. Testing administrators will
      not have to secure test booklets. If schools want to offer the SAT
      during the school day, they will not have to take as much time away
      from the classroom and can offer the test to different groups of
      students on different days.
      Test security should be improved. Since students will have different
      test questions, it is far more difficult to cheat. Also, it will be far less
      likely that a test security breach will lead to score cancellations.

How Do You Register for the Test? When Is It Offered?
Go to the College Board website and set up an account here:

https://collegereadiness.collegeboard.org/sat/register

The SAT is typically offered seven times throughout the year in the
following months: March, May, June, August, October, November, and
December. Check on the above website link for the most updated
information on test dates. Many schools may also offer an in-school test
date; check with your guidance counselor for more details. Given the more
flexible nature of the Digital SAT, schools will have more freedom to offer
the test on days that work well for schools’ and students’ schedules.

What Is a Good SAT Score?
There is not a “passing” score on the SAT—a good score for you depends
on your specific goals for college admissions. Look at this free College
Board website for detailed information on typical scores for admitted
students at schools throughout the United States:

https://bigfuture.collegeboard.org/

Will Every Question on the SAT Count the Same Towards the
Score?
The College Board is developing a scoring manual as they gather more data
from test-takers that will employ the principles of Item Response Theory—
this is a scoring approach that looks at how you perform on individual test
questions in the context of that general category of test questions. Using this
will allow the test-makers to better assess student proficiency using fewer
questions. Under this approach to scoring, performance on certain questions
may carry more weight than performance on others. What does this mean
for you as a test taker? First, do your very best on each and every question.
With fewer questions on the Digital SAT than on the previous paper SAT,
each question has more of an impact on your score. Second, look at
collegeboard.org closer to your actual SAT date to see the latest on how
your test will be scored. For this book, we will rely on previous SAT test
curves to give you our best estimate as to how your performance on your
practice tests will roughly equate to scores on the actual SAT.

Does the SAT Potentially Offer Accommodations?
For students whose test-taking is impacted by a documented disability, such
as ADHD, dyslexia, or visual or motor impairments, the SAT may offer
accommodations. The most typical accommodation is extended time,
although some students may receive more specific accommodations like
extended breaks.

One interesting potential accommodation with the Digital SAT is that you
could be eligible to take the test in a paper-based, non-adaptive format.
Should you take this paper-based, non-adaptive SAT, the test is longer: the
Reading/Writing Modules each have 33 questions last 39 minutes, and the
Math modules will each have 27 questions and last 43 minutes. Should you
have this format for your test, you can download a longer non-adaptive
practice test from the College Board.

If you have an IEP or 504 plan with your school, talk to your guidance
counselor or school administrator about applying for accommodations on
the SAT. Having an IEP or a 504 plan will not necessarily lead to having
accommodations on the SAT, but it usually helps. Allow plenty of time to
apply for accommodations—at least seven weeks. Go to this website for the
latest details on requesting SAT accommodations:

https://accommodations.collegeboard.org/

Does the SAT Offer Accommodations for English Language
Learners?
Students who are actively enrolled in an English as a Second Language
program at their school may be able to take the SAT with 50% extra time,
translated test directions, and the use of a bilingual dictionary. This service
is currently available on school-day SATs, but not on the national test dates
on weekends. Go to this website for further information about SAT supports
for English language learners:

https://collegereadiness.collegeboard.org/educators/k-12/english-learner-
supports

What Are the Similarities and Differences Between the SAT
and ACT?
The SAT and ACT have many similarities:

    They both test English grammar.
    They both test high school math up through pre-calculus.
    They both test reading comprehension.
    They both assess students’ ability to analyze graphs and charts.
    There is no guessing penalty on either test—be sure to answer every
    question.
    Colleges throughout the United States that use test scores in
    admissions (the vast majority of colleges) will accept results from
    either the SAT or ACT.

There are some important differences:

    The SAT is given in a digital, adaptive format; the ACT is given in a
    non-adaptive, typically paper-based format. The Digital SAT will be
    shorter than the ACT, with a little over half the testing time of the
    ACT. The ACT typically gives the same sets of questions to all
    students, and the questions will not change from section to section
    based on student performance.
    The SAT gives students more time to complete the same amount of
    material. For example, on the SAT math, you have about 95 seconds
    for each question, while on the ACT, you have about 60 seconds for
    each question. So, if you are more comfortable taking your time in
    completing the test, the SAT may be a better fit than the ACT. If you
    like a faster test with slightly more straight-forward questions, the
    ACT may be preferable.
    The SAT focuses more deeply on certain math topics, emphasizing
    algebra and data analysis. The ACT has a broader array of math topics,
    including things like matrices, logarithms, and hyperbolas.
    The ACT has a Science section, while the SAT tests scientific skills
    throughout the test. The final section of the ACT is a stand-alone
    science reasoning section, which assesses your skill in analyzing
    experiments, scientific research, and scientific theories. The SAT has
     questions on each section that will ask you to interpret graphs and
     charts.

What Should I Do Right Before the SAT?
Immediately before the SAT, prioritize sleep and relaxation. You will do far
better on the SAT if you are well rested and have a positive mindset. In the
week before the test, try to get 8–9 hours of sleep a night. Since the SAT is
very much a critical thinking test, the better rested you are, the better you
will be able to read, problem solve, and edit. Some practice shortly before
the test is perfectly fine to do, but make sure you are not staying up late and
cramming.

What Should I Bring with Me to the SAT?
     Admissions ticket
     Computer or tablet with the testing program already installed. You will
     be allowed to use your own computer or tablet for the Digital SAT—
     permitted options include a Windows laptop or tablet, a Mac laptop, an
     Ipad, or a school-managed Chromebook. Be sure to download the
     Bluebook testing program well in advance so that you can become
     familiar with the testing interface and will not have to download the
     program on test day. If you do not have a computer or tablet you wish
     to use, request in your test registration that the testing center provide
     you with a device. Your device needs to be charged such that it has at
     least three hours of battery life.
     Calculator with fresh batteries—most any graphing or scientific
     calculator is fine.
      There is a Desmos calculator with graphing features given in the
      program, but most students will find it easier to use their own
      calculator.
      Check to see if your calculator is approved here:
       https://collegereadiness.collegeboard.org/sat/taking-the-test/calculator-policy

     A snack and a drink to have during your breaks (don’t have food/drink
     out on your desk)
     Do not have your cell phone with you during the duration of the test—
     you are welcome to use it after the test has concluded, but the proctors
     do not want to see phones used during the test or during breaks to
     prevent possible cheating.
     Pen or pencil. You can use your preferred pen or pencil to write on the
     provided scrap paper.
     Watches, paper, and highlighters are not needed. The test program
     gives you an annotation feature and a countdown timer that you can
     view or hide, and the testing site will provide you with scrap paper.


Important Features of the Digital SAT User
Interface
Timer: There is a timer at the top of the screen. You can hide it if you find
it distracting or leave it up if you prefer. The timer will automatically
display when 5 minutes remain on the module.
Mark Question for Review: There is a bookmark logo on which you can
click to mark a question for review at the end of a module.
Before you submit your answers on the entire module, you will see a screen
that shows you which questions you have answered, which you have left
unanswered, and which you have marked for review. Go back to any of the
marked questions you would like to check out again. Keep in mind that
since there is no guessing penalty, you should be certain to answer all the
questions.
Eliminate Answer Choices: You can mark off answers you believe to be
incorrect.




Text Annotation: You can highlight and make notes on the text and
questions using the annotation tool.
When you click on the “annotate” feature, you will be able to select text and
make notes about what you have read.
With the annotation feature closed, when you move the cursor over the
selected text, your notes will appear above the selection.
Student-Produced Math Responses: You can preview what your answer
will look like before submitting your answer.




Built-in Calculator: While you can use an approved calculator of your
own, you can also use the built-in calculator that uses Desmos.com™
technology.
Math Reference Sheet: While in the math section, you can click to display
the reference sheet any time you need to see one of the provided geometry
or trigonometry formulas/facts.
 Zooming In and Out: You can make the text larger or smaller using the
 Zoom feature. Depending on the make of your computer, you can either use
 Control + and Control −, or Command + and Command −.


 General SAT Test-Taking Strategies
 While there are plenty of strategies applicable to individual sections of the
 SAT, here are ten strategies that are important throughout the exam:
 . Answer every question. There is no penalty for guessing on the SAT, so
  be sure to enter an answer for every question. Even on the fill-in questions
  on the SAT Math, there is no penalty for guessing. Put down some number
  so you have at least a chance of earning credit.

2. Become thoroughly familiar with the testing program features ahead
  of time. Download the Bluebook testing app from collegeboard.org ahead
  of time and practice with the program. You do not want the actual test to be
  the first time you use the testing program. The Digital SAT will have
  several features to help you as you take your exam:

   A clock you can use to see how much time remains on your testing
   module
   A flagging feature to highlight questions you want to return to
   A crossing-out feature so you can eliminate incorrect answers
   A zoom feature you can use to read graphics and reading material more
   easily
   An annotation feature to make notes as you read
   A built-in graphing calculator you can use throughout the math program
    It is based on the Desmos™ program that many students have previously
    used.
   A reference sheet you can click on should you need a geometry or
   trigonometry formula
3. Focus on understanding the question. If a question asks for the
  circumference and you instead calculate the area, you will be incorrect.
  Take time to thoroughly understand what is being asked.
4. Come back to questions if needed. Do not look at skipping a question as
  a sign that you have given up. Instead, use it as an opportunity to let your
  subconscious mind process the question while you consider other
  questions. Flag the question and revisit it after some time has gone by, and
  you will likely notice something that you did not previously see.
5. Write as much as you would like on the scrap paper and with the
  annotation feature. Make notes as you read the reading texts, highlight
  important phrases in the writing texts, and draw pictures and write out
  equations in the math. Writing will help you clarify what is being asked
  and notice patterns so that you can arrive at a solution.
6. Use the full amount of time. The SAT is not a race—there is no prize for
  finishing first. Also, since the questions are often challenging, you will be
  best served by taking your time to do the questions once well instead of
  doing them repeatedly, making the same mistakes. Pace yourself so that
  you finish your work right as time is called.
7. Do not look at your performance on the SAT as an all-or-nothing
  situation. The SAT is very different from typical school tests in which
  missing a few questions results in a greatly decreased grade. The SAT is
  graded on a curve, so your score is determined by how other test-takers
  perform, not just some arbitrary number. On most tests, you can likely miss
  several questions to achieve the score you desire. So, do not look at the
  SAT as something where you either do great or do poorly—a score that
  isn’t perfect can still be excellent. Also, keep in mind that a handful of the
  questions you encounter will be experimental and will not count towards
  your score; you will not be able to determine which questions these are, so
  don’t worry about them.

8. Try to figure things out. Instead of looking at SAT problems as
  knowledge to be recalled, look at them as puzzles to be solved. Do not be
  intimidated by a problem that you do not immediately know how to solve
  —instead, patiently think your way through it. The SAT is a test of your
  skill in problem solving, not simply a test of memorized knowledge.

9. Know that there will be one definite answer to each question. The
  College Board goes to extraordinary lengths to be sure that test questions
  are fair and have a definitive answer. Each question is independently
  reviewed by several test developers or educators before it makes it onto an
  actual SAT.1 In addition, each test question is pre-tested on hundreds of
  students to be sure it performs as expected prior to inclusion on a real
  SAT.2 Given these checks, you can be assured that the questions are well
  crafted. Do not overthink the questions because you are looking for a trick.
  Instead, give the SAT the benefit of the doubt and if you do not see a
  correct answer, review the texts and the questions to be sure you did not
  miss anything.

0. What works for one student may not work for another. This book
  provides you with a variety of strategic tools—use whatever works best for
  your personal situation. Students differ in terms of how quickly they read,
  how much they comprehend, their knowledge of English grammar, how
much math they have taken, and their competency with different types of
math problems. Just because a strategy worked well for your friend does
not necessarily mean it would work well for you. Use this book to fine-
tune the strategies and review the content knowledge that just you need.


Managing Test Anxiety
Like with other major performances—such as ones in music, athletics, or
theater—it is natural to have some anxiety. While some anxiety may release
adrenaline that helps sharpen your focus and improves your stamina, too
much anxiety can be problematic. Here are some tips to help keep your
anxiety under control:

Make Your Practice as Realistic as Possible
Take a full-length practice test under timed conditions with the usual
breaks. Become familiar with the testing app on your computer or tablet so
there are no surprises on test day. Eat the same food and have the same
drink you will have during your break. See how your body and your mind
perform under realistic conditions, and then make any needed adjustments.
By practicing like this before the actual test, you will both consciously and
subconsciously know what to expect.

Realize That SAT Results Are But One Part of a College
Application
While test results are perhaps the easiest part of the application to quantify,
they are one component in a holistic admissions process. If the other parts
of your application are quite strong, the test results will be less important. If
you have not done as well in school or have not had as many extracurricular
opportunities, the SAT can give you an opportunity to showcase your
college readiness.

Start Early with Your Testing
Plan on taking the SAT after you have completed Algebra 2 so you have
nearly all the math the test requires. If you take the test early, you will not
feel like your entire college application is riding on your performance on a
single day; instead, you will know that you will have multiple opportunities
to retake the exam. Colleges routinely look at your best performance, and if
your early performance is not all that great, it should not be an issue.

You Will Likely Be Able to Superscore
More and more schools allow “superscoring,” i.e., taking the best score
from each of the two test sections over multiple test dates. For example, if
you scored a 700 on the Reading and Writing and a 500 on the Math on a
test in March, and then scored a 600 on the Reading and Writing and a 700
on the Math on a test in May, your superscore would be 700 + 700 = 1,400.
So, if one half of the test does not go as well, it is OK—you can focus on
the more challenging half on the next test date. Colleges will accept results
from both the older paper-based SAT and the newer digital SAT for
admissions and superscoring purposes.


Preparing for the Test
Use previous test results to help you target your preparation. Even if the
results were from a paper-based test, they will align with the Digital SAT
and will help you plan your preparation. If you have previously taken the
PSAT or SAT, look at your scores on the College Board website:

https://collegereadiness.collegeboard.org/

If you have not previously taken the PSAT or SAT, take the Diagnostic Test
at the beginning of this book to help you determine the areas that you most
need to review. Each chapter in this book has extensive reviews and drills
for each type of question or text selection you will face, so you can focus on
the areas that need the most work. Including the Diagnostic Test, there are a
total of four practice SAT tests along with hundreds of sample digital SAT
questions. Practice full-length tests under timed conditions to develop your
problem-solving skills and learn to manage your timing.
Recommended Study Plans

If you only have one day to prepare:

     Review the general SAT strategies in this introductory chapter.
     Skim through an entire SAT practice test to become familiar with the
     directions, timing, and format.
     Try a few questions from each section.
     Do not stay up late to cram before the test—get a good night’s sleep.

If you have about a week to prepare:

     Review any past PSAT or SAT test results to determine where you
     need to focus your preparation.
     Read the test-taking strategies in each of the book chapters so you
     have a clear plan for how to attack the exam.
     Study the specific review and drills that are most relevant given your
     strengths and weaknesses.
     Take a full-length timed practice test. Score it, review your answers,
     and analyze what you need to do better in terms of timing and strategy
     to do your best on the actual test.

If you have a month or more to prepare:

     Take the full-length Diagnostic Test
     Work through all of the book chapters to review important strategies
     and content. Pay especially close attention to the areas where you
     struggled in the diagnostic test.
     Take additional full-length practice SAT Tests and review the in-depth
     solutions for each question that you missed.

The Bottom Line

With your preparation—it is not just practice that makes perfect… it is
perfect practice that makes perfect. In particular:
     Actively assess where you need the most help and target your review
     accordingly. Do not skip over challenging sections to review and do
     not waste time reviewing concepts you already fully understand.
     Practice using the timing you will use on the actual test. Do not rush
     through a practice test just to get it done, only to find that you have
     made several careless errors. Pace yourself just as you would want to
     do on test day.

Beyond the Book

The SAT assesses your fundamental academic skills and your readiness for
college-level work. So, anything you can do to build your reading, writing,
and mathematical problem-solving skills will help you perform better on
the SAT.

     Take rigorous courses, like Advanced Placement and International
     Baccalaureate classes. The College Board administers the AP exam
     program, so there is considerable cross-over between the skills
     assessed on AP exams and the skills assessed on the SAT.
     Read widely on your own. Students who read for fun tend to find the
     reading comprehension section easier than students who look at
     reading as a boring chore. Go to your local library, talk to a librarian,
     and find a book or magazine that really interests you. Install an e-
     reader on your phone so that you can easily read when you have spare
     time.
     Download the testing app from the College Board and practice the
     adaptive tests on it. The online resources for this book include tips on
     how to best practice with the official adaptive digital SAT tests from
     College Board along with explanations to the most challenging
     questions found on those tests. With the tests and drills in this book
     along with the free material from College Board, you will have more
     than enough material to use to get ready for test day.

Let’s get to work!
1https://collegereadiness.collegeboard.org/educators/higher-ed/test-validity-design/test-development
2https://collegereadiness.collegeboard.org/pdf/sat-suite-assessments-technical-manual.pdf
     PART 2
Diagnostic Test
Diagnostic Test

A full-length SAT diagnostic test is on the pages that follow. Allow a little
over two hours of uninterrupted time to complete the entire test. Find a spot
to take the test where you will not be distracted. You can take a ten-minute
break after the two Reading and Writing modules and before the two Math
modules.

Completing this diagnostic test will help you determine your SAT strengths
and weaknesses.

Think about the following after you take the test.

      How are you with timing?
      Do you find certain types of reading questions to be challenging?
      Do particular reading texts and genres give you more difficulty than
      others?
      Do you need to review English grammar concepts?
      Do some types of writing questions give you more trouble than
      others?
      Do you need to review or learn some math concepts?
      What kinds of math questions are toughest for you?

After completing the test, review your answers with the “Diagnostic Test
Analysis Guide” to determine what types of questions and concepts you
most need to study.

Good luck!
Overview
This SAT Practice Test is made up of a Reading and Writing section and a
Math section.

Note: In this book, there is an answer sheet you can use to write down your
letter choices and math answers. Feel free to use the sheet to record your
answers or simply circle and write down your answers in the test as you go.

Section 1: Reading and Writing (54 Questions) There are two 27-question
modules in the Reading and Writing section.

Section 2: Math (44 Questions)

There are two 22-question modules in the Math section. You can use a
calculator throughout the math section.

Modules
The modules in each section are timed separately. You can review your
answers in each module before time expires. When the time reaches zero,
you will automatically move on to the next section. You are unable to return
to a completed module.

Directions
At the beginning of each section, there are directions for answering the
questions.
Diagnostic Test

Section 1, Module 1: Reading and Writing
32 MINUTES, 27 QUESTIONS


DIRECTIONS
             You will be tested on a variety of important reading and writing skills. Each question
             has one or more passages, possibly including a graph or table. Carefully read each
             passage and question and choose the best answer to the question based on the
             passage(s).
             Every question in this section is multiple-choice, with four possible answers. Each
             question has only one best answer.




One of the most common ways that people can amass wealth is through
_________ equity in their homes.

 1
Which choice completes the text with the most logical and precise word or
phrase?

        assembling
        manufacturing
        building
        fabricating
Modern day graffiti creates the same questions. Most people would agree
that a quickly spray-painted tag is not art, but some graffiti is very
elaborate, well planned, and objectively beautiful. Some graffiti _________
the value of an area by making it appear abandoned and unkempt.

 2
Which choice completes the text with the most logical and precise word or
phrase?

        quiets
        recedes
        lowers
        muffles

While there certainly are many potential careers that students may find
rewarding, students with a math and science _________ should give
engineering serious consideration.

 3
Which choice completes the text with the most logical and precise word or
phrase?

        aptitude
        warmth
        hankering
        frenzy

Making something that is truly delicious for one’s friends and family can be
a formative experience that leads one to pursue a career as a chef. While not
everybody can be a celebrity chef with millions of television fans, there are
many _________ to a fulfilling career in the food services industry.

 4
Which choice completes the text with the most logical and precise word or
phrase?

          boulevards
          promenades
          thoroughfares
          avenues

One key reason C. lecturlarius (bedbugs) can be so difficult to remove is
their physical properties. They are tiny brown bugs that live solely on the
blood of other animals, so edible poison traps won’t work the way they do
for ants. In addition, they can live months without food, which makes
starving them out nearly impossible, and they lay eggs that are _________
to regular pest control methods and stick in unreachable nooks and
crannies.

 5
Which choice completes the text with the most logical and precise word or
phrase?

          susceptible
          prone
          impervious
          vulnerable

The following text is from Georgia Douglas Johnson’s 1920 poem “Calling
Dreams.”

     The right to make my dreams come true,
     I ask, nay, I demand of life;
     Nor shall fate’s deadly contraband
     Impede my steps, nor countermand;
     Too long my heart against the ground
     Has beat the dusty years around;
     And now at length I rise! I wake!
     And stride into the morning break!

 6
Which choice best states the main purpose of the text?

          To express the inevitable frustration that comes when you cannot
           accomplish a goal      To show a more contemplative attitude
           towards acceptance of your fate       To present a personal
           narrative about the importance of travel to a richer life   To
           emphasize the need to not let anything stand in the way of
           achieving your dreams The following is a portion of an address
           given by Senator Herbert H. Lehman at the annual membership
           meeting of the Urban League of Greater New York in June of
           1956, as reported in the Arizona Sun.
     The Urban League has furnished a framework within which men of
     good will of all races could work together to achieve steady advances
     toward the goal of adjustment, focusing their efforts on the
     neighborhood and the community. This organization has helped to show
     how vast are the ramifications of inter-group and inter-racial adjustment,
     what concrete and specific evils flow from discrimination and
     segregation, and what must and can be done about it. Some people,
     including some of the leaders of our government, act as though civil
     rights were a brand-new problem, which has just arisen and needs
     nothing so much as to be studied. And they indicate that just as soon as
     they finish studying it, they will probably do something about it. And, of
     course, that may take a long time.

 7
Which choice best describes the function of the underlined sentence in the
text as a whole?
          To show how those who oppose the advancement of civil rights
           will inevitably resort to personal attacks     To emphasize the
           need for increased funding for socially active causes      To assert
           that opponents of civil rights progress will likely use excessive
           delay to achieve their aims      To argue that the goal of public
           policy is to promote social justice The following text is from
           Upton Sinclair’s 1906 novel The Jungle.

     And then there was Marija Berczynskas, who, fired with jealousy by the
     success of Jurgis, had set out upon her own responsibility to get a place.
     Marija had nothing to take with her save her two brawny arms and the
     word “job,” laboriously learned; but with these she had marched about
     Packingtown all day, entering every door where there were signs of
     activity. Out of some she had been ordered with curses; but Marija was
     not afraid of man or devil, and asked everyone she saw—visitors and
     strangers, or work-people like herself, and once or twice even high and
     lofty office personages, who stared at her as if they thought she was
     crazy. In the end, however, she had reaped her reward.

 8
According to the text, Marija most likely has what level of proficiency in
the English language?

          Totally fluent
          Mostly fluent
          Somewhat proficient       Very limited

The following passage is from A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man by
James Joyce, published in 1916. Stephen Dedalus, Joyce’s protagonist,
yearns to be an artist but was raised and educated to join the clergy. Below
he contemplates the diverging paths before him after a priest warns him of
the permanence of his intended holy position.

     The Reverend Stephen Dedalus, S.J.
     His name in that new life leaped into characters before his eyes and to it
     there followed a mental sensation of an undefined face or colour of a
     face. The colour faded and became strong like a changing glow of pallid
     brick red. Was it the raw reddish glow he had so often seen on wintry
     mornings on the shaven gills of the priests? The face was eyeless and
     sour-favoured and devout, shot with pink tinges of suffocated anger. Was
     it not a mental spectre of the face of one of the Jesuits whom some of the
     boys called Lantern Jaws and others Foxy Campbell?

 9
According to the text, how would the narrator most likely characterize how
most priests in this story would handle their emotions?

          By repressing them    By celebrating them         By eliminating
           them     By expressing them Text 1

In her essay, “The Realities of Love at First Sight,” Fisher explains how we
evaluate an individual within three minutes of meeting them based on their
physical attributes, voice, and words. First, we decide if they are attractive,
then we evaluate their clothing and stature, before moving on to the sound
and tone of their voice. Lastly, we consider what they actually say. She
concludes that we choose partners whose biological chemicals complement
our own.

Text 2

Psychology Today renders love a three-step scientific process. First, a
release of the hormone dopamine causes “feel good” emotions. In this
stage, we feel attracted to an individual and associate them with feelings of
intense joy. Next, our neurotransmitters—norepinephrine and
phenylethylamine—lead to focused attention on the object of our attraction.
Lastly, our brain reward system is activated, sending chemical messages
that elevate mood and make an addiction-like urge to be with that person.

 10
How does the analysis of the love process in Text 2 differ from the one in
Text 1?

         It cites the role that chemicals might play.
         It focuses on the actual chemistry of the process.
         It has just two concrete steps.
         It emphasizes the essential importance of human decision making.

Microplastics are microscopic particles of plastic that tend to accumulate
toxins and are in some cases toxic themselves. Unfortunately, microplastics
tend to end up being eaten by various organisms. The primary reason for
this problem is that in recent years, approximately 380 million tons of
plastic are produced annually. Plastic is not biodegradable, which means
that once it enters the environment it can take several hundred years to
degrade. In fact, if all the plastic that was produced between 1950 and 1960
had been disposed of in the ocean, _________

 11
Which insertion at the end of the text, if true, would best support the
author’s claim?

         nearly all of it would remain.
         about half of it would remain.
         about one-third of it would remain.
         almost none of it would remain.

The Souls of Black Folk is a 1903 literary work by American author W. E.
B. Du Bois. One cultural aspect on which Du Bois focuses in this work is
the prevalence of “sorrow songs” in African American culture, i.e., musical
compositions that evoke the suffering of slaves. In this work, Du Bois
strongly suggests that American creativity is focused on energetic
inventiveness: __________________
 12
Which quotation from The Souls of Black Folk most effectively illustrates
the claim?

        “Out of [the slave songs] rose for me morning, noon, and night,
         bursts of wonderful melody, full of the voices of my brothers and
         sisters, full of the voices of the past.”
        “Little of beauty has America given the world save the rude
         grandeur God himself stamped on her bosom; the human spirit in
         this new world has expressed itself in vigor and ingenuity rather
         than in beauty.”
        “Some [slave songs], like “Near the lake where drooped the
         willow,” passed into current airs and their source was forgotten;
         others were caricatured on the ‘minstrel’ stage and their memory
         died away.”
        “[Slave songs] are the music of an unhappy people, of the children
         of disappointment; they tell of death and suffering and unvoiced
         longing toward a truer world, of misty wanderings and hidden
         ways.”




Through the improvement of technology and microscopy techniques, the
differences between prokaryotes and eukaryotes were discovered. Protists
previously fell under the category of prokaryotes, which were originally
classified as anucleate organisms and unicellular. Technological advances
led to the understanding that protists are eukaryotic organisms even though
most protists do remain unicellular. Since 1675, scientists ___________

 13
Which choice most effectively uses data from the graph to complete the
example?

        have found far more species of protists than other animal species.
        conducted experiments on over 100,000 species of protists in
         laboratory environments.
        have discovered approximately 200,000 new species of protists.
        analyzed a total of 900,000 plant and protist species in their quest
         to find new life forms.

Ernst Haeckel was a German zoologist, naturalist, philosopher, physician,
and about every about other type of scientist. He lived from 1834–1919. He
was a contemporary of Charles Darwin and helped popularize On the
Origin of Species in Germany. Contrary to Darwin and what we know now,
Haeckel believed humans originated in Asia, not Africa. An accomplished
artist, he created illustrations of animals and sea creatures with the same
color and detail as the ornithological illustrations of James Audubon. Even
though Americans aren’t as familiar with Haeckel as they are with Darwin
or Audubon, Haeckel ___________

 14
Which choice most logically completes the text?

        is a historical figure who is worth studying.
        continues to write intriguing articles in the present day.
        should be consigned to the dustbin of history.
        was truly a literary pioneer and poetic innovator.
In considering the following ___________ be well to bear in mind that
records of the bird migration in this locality have been made each year for
the past thirty-one years.

 15
Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the conventions of
Standard English?

         remarks: it may      remarks; it may      remarks, it may
           remarks it may

We hear about water every day. More than 70% of ___________ surface is
covered with water. Water is a requirement for terrestrial life. Water makes
up most of our bodies.

 16
Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the conventions of
Standard English?

         our planets
         their planets
         our planet’s
         their planets’

It is believed that ___________ on as near the actual date of their arrival as
it would ordinarily be possible to obtain them.

 17
Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the conventions of
Standard English?

         the great majority of species: were recorded      the great majority
          of species were recorded      the great majority of species, were
          recorded     the great majority of species; were recorded
         Schrödinger, a father of quantum mechanics himself, surely
         understood the uses of quantum superposition but also sought to
         bring attention to ___________ shortcomings.

 18
Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the conventions of
Standard English?

        its
        it’s
        their
        there

General Douglas MacArthur and President Harry ___________ both
American leaders in the late 1940s and early 1950s in the aftermath of the
Allied victory during World War II.

 19
Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the conventions of
Standard English?

        Truman; Great Men, by all accounts—were          Truman—Great
         Men, by all accounts, were      Truman: Great Men, by all
         accounts—were        Truman—Great Men, by all accounts—were
         Two of the primary positions “between” nurse and doctor
         ___________ those of nurse practitioner and physician assistant.
         You can think of a nurse practitioner as a more advanced nurse
         and a physician assistant as a more restricted doctor.

 20
Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the conventions of
Standard English?

        are
        is
        has
        was

Over time, when the town began to adopt more mainstream customs with
respect to family dynamics, the rate of cardiovascular disease
___________.

 21
Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the conventions of
Standard English?

        rise
        risen
        rose
        rised

Henrik Ibsen and August Strindberg are truly giants of playwriting. The
hallmarks of modern theater in their present incarnation—from stark
realism to surreal expressionism—___________

 22
Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the conventions of
Standard English?

        from the two mens’ works directly derive.
        from the works of these two men directly derive.
        derive directly from the works of these two men.
        come directly from this.

Music is a combination of specific sound waves started and stopped at
specific times. Some waves align nicely with one another or contrast nicely
with one another, ___________ others are neither regularly contrasting nor
matching.

 23
Which choice completes the text with the most logical transition?

        while
        because
        since
        so

Specific engineering disciplines focus on particular types of physical
problems. ___________ aerospace engineering is mostly concerned with
optimizing the performance of airplanes, while civil engineering is mostly
concerned with improving physical structures and public works.

 24
Which choice completes the text with the most logical transition?

        However,
        In addition,
        For instance,
        Surprisingly,

In the past few years, more than one horribly botched painting has made the
news when it was delivered back to the owner looking nothing like the
original. ___________ the art restorer working on the painting is not both
topnotch and very well trained in artistic techniques from the time-period of
the piece, the results of a restoration attempt can be disastrous.

 25
Which choice completes the text with the most logical transition?
        If
        While
        Because
        Since

While researching a topic, a student has taken the following notes:
      Robert Frost is one of the most popular poets in modern day.
      His poems centered around philosophical and social issues,
      questioning common assumptions with ironic writing.
      One of his most famous poems is “The Road Not Taken.”
      It encourages readers to take the path less traveled by the world or by
      peers.
      Another one of Frost’s poems is “Nothing Gold Can Stay.”
      This poem reflects on the fleeting nature of beauty and life.

 26
The student wants to introduce Robert Frost to an audience unfamiliar with
his work. Which choice most effectively uses relevant information from the
notes to accomplish this goal?

        “The Road Not Taken” considers taking the path less traveled by
         others.
        Robert Frost is a famous modern poet whose work encourages
         critical thinking.
        Analysis of beauty and life are common themes in many modern-
         day poems by Robert Frost and others.
        Irony is a useful poetic device to convey one’s skepticism about
         worldly assumptions.

While researching a topic, a student has taken the following notes:
      Flying squirrels are the most numerous squirrels in Ohio, yet they are
      the least frequently observed.
      Flying squirrels are nocturnal.
      Flying squirrels do not actually fly; loose skin extends from wrist to
      ankle and allows them to glide between trees.
      Flying squirrels prefer to live in forests and not in suburbs.
      Habitat loss is one of the greatest threats facing flying squirrels.

 27
The student wants to correct a likely misconception about flying squirrels.
Which choice most effectively uses relevant information from the notes to
accomplish this goal?

        Flying squirrels can usually be observed at night as opposed to the
         day.
        Despite their name, flying squirrels glide rather than fly.
        While hunting poses a threat to flying squirrels, habitat loss is
        ultimately the greater danger.
        Even though flying squirrels are scarce in Ohio, they can still be
         easily seen.
Section 1, Module 2: Reading and Writing
32 MINUTES, 27 QUESTIONS


DIRECTIONS
             You will be tested on a variety of important reading and writing skills. Each question
             has one or more passages, possibly including a graph or table. Carefully read each
             passage and question and choose the best answer to the question based on the
             passage(s).
             Every question in this section is multiple-choice, with four possible answers. Each
             question has only one best answer.




The vacation had the opposite effect on Jim. He despised the upcoming
days and was depressed at the thought of his recent break-up. Although he
marched into work 15 minutes early on Monday morning, he was feeling
very ___________.

 1
Which choice completes the text with the most logical and precise word or
phrase?

        energetic
        dispirited
        invigorated
        rejuvenated
An education is usually thought to have intrinsic ___________ rather than
extrinsic. That is, its worth comes from the love of knowledge rather than
something monetary. However, with the rising cost of tuition, one could
maybe argue that there is a fiscal price related to education.

 2
Which choice completes the text with the most logical and precise word or
phrase?

        value
        price
        principles
        standard

The night sky erupted with great displays of sound and light. Every couple
of minutes, from dusk till late, the loud, explosive sounds would shake the
sky and some unsuspecting and innocent below. It is not lightning or
anything ___________; rather, it is meant to be a symbol of patriotism. It
was a week before the Fourth of July, a day meant to celebrate the United
States and those who defend it, and the fireworks had already begun.

 3
Which choice completes the text with the most logical and precise word or
phrase?

        considerate
        nefarious
        congenial
        duplicitous

Though Friedel and Crafts discovered a new chemical reaction, this reaction
technique was virtually useless to the scientific community because it
lacked selectivity. Selectivity causes a reaction to favor one product over
another potential product of the reaction. Without selectivity, it is
impossible for chemists to ___________ the products of their reaction. Not
being able to separate one product from another makes a reaction useless
because even a small alteration in a molecule can result in adverse effects.

 4
Which choice completes the text with the most logical and precise word or
phrase?

        create
        demonstrate
        reciprocate
        isolate

As anyone who has watched a bag of instant popcorn expand knows, the
tray inside of a microwave oven rotates as the food cooks. This rotation has
the interesting effect of increasing the kinetic energy of the food’s polar
molecules, as they too must constantly rotate to remain aligned with the
field. As they do so, these molecules rub and grind against their neighbors,
converting their kinetic energy into intermolecular friction, and thus
evolving heat. In fact, the motion of molecules is so directly related to
internal heat that one can calculate a material’s exact temperature by
averaging the kinetic energy of the atoms and molecules that comprise it.

 5
As used in the text, what does the word “evolving” most nearly mean?

        Advancing
        Reproducing
        Selecting
        Generating
Advocates of the presidential model posit that it is more democratic than
the parliamentary system because the people themselves choose their
executive. They contend that the fixed terms even allow for some stability
that the parliamentary organization does not allow. Likewise, a further
benefit lies in the separation of powers subject to checks and balances, in
which the executive and legislative bodies can monitor one another and
assure that power is not centralized. Yet, critics of the system assert that the
president’s national status affords tendencies toward authoritarianism.
Furthermore, as a rule, deadlocks or stalemates are much more common
within a system that often has executive and legislative bodies under the
control of different parties. Cynics therefore suggest that the presidential
model is privy to discord and inefficiency—not to mention, presidents are
difficult to remove when thought to be unfit.

 6
Which choice best states the main purpose of the text?

         It explores the pros and cons of the presidential model.
         It compares the presidential and parliamentary models.
         It highlights the superior aspects of the presidential model.
         It gives specific examples of countries that practice presidential
          politics.

Some people simply believe that few, if any, other civilizations outside
those on Earth exist. The Rare Earth Hypothesis suggests that Earth is
unique, and so, therefore, is intelligent life. Others theorize that intelligent
life has a tendency of destroying itself quickly; they hypothesize that self-
annihilation occurs before contact can be made. On the other hand, many
postulate that extraterrestrial intelligence (ETI) does exist, but we see no
evidence for a variety of reasons. Perhaps we are too far apart in space or
time; perhaps humans, a relatively new species, haven’t searched long
enough or maybe we aren’t listening properly; what if our distant neighbors
are using different frequencies?
 7
Which choice best describes the function of the final sentence in the overall
structure of the text?

           It explains why the author is quite pessimistic about the possibility
            of finding ETI.
           It offers suggestions that have not likely been considered by
            scientists.
           It gives a recommended course of action to solve a scientific
            problem.
           It elaborates on possible reasons why we have not found evidence
            of ETI.

The following text is from Carl Sandburg’s 1916 poem “Theme in Yellow.”

     I spot the hills
     With yellow balls in autumn.
     I light the prairie cornfields
     Orange and tawny gold clusters
     And I am called pumpkins.
     On the last of October
     When dusk is fallen
     Children join hands
     And circle round me
     Singing ghost songs
     And love to the harvest moon;
     I am a jack-o’-lantern
     With terrible teeth
     And the children know
     I am fooling.

 8
The narrator of the poem is best described as which of the following?

          A child
          A pumpkin
          A ghost
          A season

A historian writes an article suggesting that a shortcoming of the Iroquois
Great League governmental structure was a decision-making process that
led to paralysis.

 9
Which quotation from the article would best illustrate this claim?

          “The Great League of Peace and Power maintained Iroquois peace
           from the 15th century until the American Revolution.”
          “The Iroquois council could not decide unanimously which side to
           choose. With no consensus, each nation made its own decision.
           The League split.”
          “Despite being scattered, the Iroquois survived. Today in New
           York State, a strong Iroquois Reservation remains.”
          “These Iroquois are strongly independent and demand sovereignty.
           Despite this, they are also American citizens. On the reservations,
           traditions live on, as does the spirit of the Great League.”

A biologist analyzes the relationship between Midwestern bird species and
the honeysuckle fruit. They find that the organisms have developed a
mutualist relationship: native species of birds throughout the Midwest rely
on honeysuckle fruit as a staple food source in the fall, while honeysuckle
benefits in being spread to new regions when its seeds are eaten and
subsequently dispersed by the birds.

 10
Which of the following situations would be most resemble the relationship
discussed in the text?

        Large whale species consume krill at higher latitudes.
        The male gorilla does not help with infants but does help defend
         against predators.
        Oxpecker birds eat predatory insects off the backs of zebras.
        Humans consume the eggs of organically raised chickens.

Occupational therapists work with clients to help them better perform their
daily tasks. An occupational therapist examines what aspect of occupational
therapy will most likely lead to positive client outcomes, replacing
dysfunctional occupations (activities) and replacing them with functional
ones. The therapist hypothesizes that a collaborative relationship between
the occupational therapist and patient will minimize occupational
dysfunction.

 11
Which of the following, if true, would most directly support the therapist’s
hypothesis?

        Other occupations, like substance abuse, lead to occupational
         dysfunction. These dysfunctional occupations are not productive
         and can be detrimental to health and wellness.
        Behaviors, habits, and performance patterns are changed when
         dysfunctional occupation is reduced or extinguished and replaced
         with meaningful, psychologically rewarding functional
         occupation.
         Changing dysfunctional occupation and replacing it with functional
          occupation is challenging for the client; through therapeutic use of
          self, the occupational therapist can establish the necessary trust
          and rapport.
         Self-regulation strategies include personal awareness of stressors,
          stress management, and using occupation to reduce stress.




Epidemic illnesses can cause significant loss of human life. A virologist
attempts to determine what characteristics of flu viruses will result in the
greatest human mortality. The virologist hypothesizes that if a flu virus has
too high a fatality rate, its victims will die off before they can transmit the
virus to other humans, ultimately resulting in relatively few cases.

 12
Which of the viruses in the table would most effectively be used to support
the virologist’s hypothesis?

         H5N1 and H7N9
         H1N1 and H2N2
         H3N2 and H1N1
         H3N2 and H2N2
Graph source: www.iihs.org/topics/fatality-statistics/detail/gender


A researcher who specializes in analyzing the aftermath of car wrecks
determines that car crash dummies are almost always designed to represent
the male skeletal and muscular anatomy. The researcher thinks that car
manufacturers as well as consumers should demand that the National
Highway Traffic Safety Administration develop dummies that represent not
just men and women, but a variety of sizes of men and women as well as a
variety of sizes of children. The researcher argues that the government
should prioritize diverse demographic representation among crash test
dummies to gather the most helpful information for consumers.

 13
Which statement would best utilize the information in the table to provide
an argument against the researcher’s position?

           Given the higher crash rate of male drivers as compared to female
            drivers, it is understandable that car manufacturers may prioritize
            male crash test dummies.
           Since drivers over 70 years of age are over twice as likely to get in
            vehicle crashes as those in their 60s, increased regulations about
            the maximum driver age should be implemented.
           Teenage drivers are far more likely to get in car accidents than
            those in other age groups, so the age to earn a driver’s license
         should be increased.
        Female drivers represent the majority of miles driven in a given
         year, so it is critical that there be a higher priority on their safety.

English chemist John Newlands proposed a “law of octaves” that was
based, shockingly, on the standard musical scale, and which suggested that
the periodicity of the elements follows a similar eight “note” pattern.
Though his contemporaries heavily criticized Newlands, the idea was
eventually vindicated by the octet theory of chemical bonding, which
___________

 14
Which choice most logically completes the text?

        demonstrated the need for additional research to confirm his
         hypothesis.
        confirmed the significance of the eight-element series in chemical
         behavior.
        approached the problem of chemical classification differently from
         Newlands.
        served to disprove his interesting yet ultimately inaccurate theory.

Bacteria is adapting and changing in response to our attempts to quash it
and is consequently becoming more of a threat than ever before. Doctors
and patients should be cautious and should ensure that antibiotics are truly
necessary before contributing to this issue. Fewer antibiotics prescribed will
mean less of a chance for C. diff for each individual patient and a greater
chance that antibiotics will ___________

 15
Which choice most logically completes the text?

        remain effective for the people who genuinely need them.
        develop increased resistance to bacterial modification.
        contribute to the outbreak of endemic illnesses.
        become increasingly recommended for a host of illnesses.

___________ that live in the eastern region of Australia and in Tasmania.
Platypuses typically live in bodies of freshwater like rivers, wetlands,
billabongs, and estuaries; however, they have been known to live in
brackish—a combination of fresh and salt water—estuaries as well.

 16
Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the conventions of
Standard English?

        Ornithorhynchus anatinus also known as platypuses are semi-
         aquatic mammals        Ornithorhynchus anatinus, also known as
         platypuses are semi-aquatic mammals          Ornithorhynchus
         anatinus—also known as platypuses, are semi-aquatic mammals
             Ornithorhynchus anatinus, also known as platypuses, are
         semi-aquatic mammals The bystander effect is a psychological
         phenomenon that prevents people from helping those in need. The
         psychology behind this phenomenon is actually fairly simple.
         ___________ In a crowded place such as a stadium, people may
         think “I couldn’t get there in time,” or, “there are so many people
         who are closer to the scene of distress.”

 17
Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the conventions of
Standard English?

        When several people observe a situation that calls for intervention,
        the responsibility to help feels less pressing since it is diffused
        among all the observers.
        When several people observe a situation that calls for intervention:
        the responsibility to help feels less pressing since it is diffused
         among all the observers.
         When several people observe a situation that calls for intervention:
         the responsibility to help feels less pressing, since it is diffused
         among all the observers.
         When several people observe a situation that calls for intervention
         —the responsibility to help feels—less pressing since it is
         diffused among all the observers.

Scientists speculate that the even though the evolutionary purpose of the
toxins in ergot fungus was to discourage animals from eating it, humans
were unable to prevent its consumption. ___________ harvested en masse
and was only rarely sorted to remove ergot fungus.

 18
Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the conventions of
Standard English?

         Rye, like other grains, was Rye, like other grains was
         Rye—like other grains—were
         Rye—like other grains, was

States can best be characterized by their natural idiosyncrasies. Florida has
its powdered sugar beaches; Nebraska, its butterscotch ___________

 19
Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the conventions of
Standard English?

         cornfields; and Arizona it’s majestic Grand Canyon.
         cornfields: Arizona its majestic Grand Canyon.
         cornfields; and Arizona, its majestic Grand Canyon.
         cornfields, and Arizona, it’s majestic Grand Canyon.
While hiking has always been known to be a good form of exercise, current
research ___________ that its added mental benefits have a significant
impact on the physical health of those who hike.

 20
Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the conventions of
Standard English?

        suggest
        suggests
        had suggested
        has suggesting

When visiting museums, most people take for granted the rooms upon
rooms of historic paintings, often hundreds of years old, that ___________
carefully preserved for the public’s view.

 21
Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the conventions of
Standard English?

        is
        are
        has
        was

Servals are medium-sized, gold-colored cats covered in darker patterns of
stripes and spots. Having a lighter-colored coat with a darker pattern
___________ more difficult to spot them.

 22
Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the conventions of
Standard English?
        make them
        makes them
        makes it
        make it

The Y-Bridge (named for its distinctive Y-shape) was designed to span the
confluence of the Muskingum and Licking rivers. ___________ it crosses
both rivers, Ripley’s Believe It Or Not once claimed that the Y-Bridge was
the only bridge in the world where it was possible to cross and still end up
on the same side of the river, and Amelia Earhart once called Zanesville
“the most recognizable city in the country” because of the bridge.

 23
Which choice completes the text with the most logical transition?

        For
        Because
        While
        When

Chronic traumatic encephalopathy (CTE) is a progressive
neurodegenerative brain disease that is largely difficult to diagnose and
treat. Indeed, ___________ accurate diagnosis can only be done by looking
at portions of the brain under a microscope, a true CTE diagnosis can’t be
made until an autopsy is done on a deceased sufferer.

 24
Which choice completes the text with the most logical transition?

        since
        and
        also
        in fact

While researching a topic, a student has taken the following notes:
      Ballet traces its history to the Italian Renaissance in the 15th century.
      Catherine de Medici, a native Italian, was queen consort of France in
      the mid-1500s.
      Catherine de Medici enjoyed ballet, introduced it to the French court,
      and sponsored large and detailed performances.
      The French court continued to value ballet and King Louis XIV even
      performed in ballets.
      The world’s first ballet school, Académie Royale de Danse, was
      founded in France in 1661 with the support of King Louis XIV.
      The ballet school introduced the five positions all ballet students still
      learn today.

 25
The student wants to make a generalization about the early sponsors of
ballet. Which choice most effectively uses relevant information from the
notes to accomplish this goal?

        Catherine de Medici was one of the greatest ballet enthusiasts of all
         time.
        Some of the same ballet moves that originated in the 1600s are still
         used today.
        French and Italian royals were significant backers of ballet dance
         performance.
        Both male and female dancers have been skilled ballet dancers
         throughout history.

While researching a topic, a student has taken the following notes:
      There are two types of hearing loss: conductive and sensorineural.
      Conductive hearing loss happens when sounds cannot get through, or
      conduct, to the inner ear.
      Conductive hearing loss can have many causes and sometimes it’s a
      simple cause, such a blockage in the ear canal.
      Sensorineural hearing loss happens when structures in the inner ear
      are damaged.
      Sensorineural hearing loss also has many causes—two common
      causes are aging and exposure to loud noises.

 26
The student wants to recommend specific measures that people can take to
avoid hearing loss. Which choice most effectively uses relevant information
from the notes to accomplish this goal?

        Conductive hearing loss can result from the blockage of sound in
         the inner ear.
        To prevent hearing loss, avoid putting objects inside your ear, and
         cover your ears at loud rock concerts.
        Older people are more susceptible to sensorineural hearing loss
         since this sort of loss becomes exacerbated with the passage of
         time.
        Much like with blindness, hearing loss can often be prevented by
        taking precautionary steps.

While researching a topic, a student has taken the following notes:
      Effective Altruism is an emerging form of charity that evaluates
      causes through a framework of data and evidence.
      To be a good candidate for Effective Altruism, a problem must be
      solvable.
      Effective Altruism seeks to use charity money in the most efficient
      way to do the most good.
      This results in Effective Altruism targeting specific causes that may
      have previously been overlooked by charitable endeavors.
      Some causes that have benefited from Effective Altruism include the
      nearing eradication of Guinea worm disease, the treatment of diabetic
      eye disease in Bangladesh, and cash incentives for completing
      routine childhood vaccines in Nigeria.

 27
The student wants to suggest a charitable cause that would be a good
candidate for the approach of Effective Altruism. Which choice most
effectively uses relevant information from the notes to accomplish this
goal?

        Marching in a local parade to encourage the world to seek out
        peaceful resolutions to warfare.
        Encouraging museum donors to purchase an additional sculpture
         for the largest wing of the museum.
        Earning a graduate degree in statistics so that one can more readily
         evaluate the costs and benefits of certain governmental actions.
        Raising money to remove poisonous lead-based paints from school
         facilities in an impoverished city.
Section 2, Module 1: Math
35 MINUTES, 22 QUESTIONS


DIRECTIONS

 All expressions and variables use real numbers.
 All figures are drawn to scale.
 Every figure lies in a plane.
 The domain of given functions is the set of all real numbers for which the corresponding value of
 the function is real.

For multiple-choice questions, solve the problem and pick the correct
answer from the provided choices. Each multiple-choice question has only
one correct answer.
For student-produced response questions, solve each problem and record
your answer following these guidelines:
 If you find more than one correct answer, enter just one answer.
 You can enter up to five characters for a positive answer and up to six characters (this includes the
 negative sign) for a negative answer.
 If your answer is a fraction that does not fit in the given space, enter the decimal equivalent
 instead.
 If your answer is a decimal that does not fit in the given space, enter it by stopping at or rounding
 up at the fourth digit.
 If your answer is a mixed number (like        ), enter it as an improper fraction (9/2) or its decimal
 equivalent (4.5).
 Do not enter symbols like a comma, dollar sign, or percent sign.




                                         Examples
REFERENCE




The number of degrees of arc in a circle is 360.
The number of radians of arc in a circle is 2π.
The sum of the measures in degrees of the angles of a triangle is 180.
 1




         4


         9

 2
If                , what is the value of x?




 3
The graph of a line in the x-y plane is totally vertical and has a negative x-
intercept. Which of the following could represent a line with these
conditions?

         x = −5
         y = −4
         y = −x − 2
         x = −4y 4
If     , what is ?

         3
         4
         8
         12
 5




What equation represents the relationship between mass, m, and volume, v,
in the above graph?

        v = 3m     m = 3v      m = 6v        v=m+2

 6
What is the median of this set of numbers?

                            {2, 5, 7, 9, 12, 16}
        7
        8
        8.5
        9
 7
There are 3 teaspoons in a tablespoon and 16 tablespoons in a cup. How
much of a cup or cups would there be in 12 teaspoons?

            cup       cup      2 cups
         6 cups

 8
The total calories for a particular salad are 1,100. The salad consists of only
cheese, vegetables, and dressing. If the total caloric value of the cheese and
vegetables is 650, and each packet of dressing used on the salad has 75
calories, how many packets of dressing were used on the salad?




 9
If      , what is the value of x?




 10
Suppose the price of a product is typically p dollars. If a 30% discount is
applied to the price, what is the discounted price in terms of p?

         0.03p     0.3p      0.7p       1.3p 11
The equation for gravitational force, Fg, is the following:
G is the gravitational constant, m1 and m2 are the masses of objects, and r is
the distance between the objects.

How would the gravitational force between two objects change if the
distance between the objects doubles while all other quantities remain the
same?

         It would be twice the original force.
         It would be four times the original force.
         It would be   of the original force.

         It would be   of the original force.

 12




If there were a randomly selected pet owner from the table above, what is
the probability that they would be a male cat owner?




 13
A restaurant charges $5 for a cheeseburger and $4 for a hamburger. If
Connor wants to buy at least 2 of each sandwich and spend a total of
between $20–$30 (inclusive) on sandwiches, what is a possible value for
the number of cheeseburgers Connor purchased?




 14
What is y in terms of x in the following inequality?

                                 12 < −4x + 6y
         3 + 2x > y      6x − 2 < y



 15
A particular line is graphed in the xy-plane and uses only real numbers. The
line has a positive slope and a positive y-intercept. Which of these points
could be on the line?

         (−4, 5)      (2, 0)
         (3, −6)      (0, −1) 16
Triangle ABC has a right angle B. If side AB has a length of 7 units and side
BC has a length of 24 units, what is the length in units of side AC?




 17
The function f is expressed as f(x) = k for all values of x, and k is a constant
real number. Which of the following must be true?
 I. f(x) forms a line.
II. f(x) has a slope of zero.
III. f(x) has a range from − ∞ to + ∞.
          I only
          II only        Only I and II   Only II and III 18
In a right rectangular prism, the smallest edge is 2 cm long. The next
greatest edge is twice the length of the smallest edge, and the greatest edge
is 3 times the length of the smallest edge. What is the surface area of the
prism?

          6 sq cm.
          24 sq cm.
          64 sq cm.
          88 sq cm.

  19
Kamini wants to make money from recycling aluminum cans and glass
bottles. Her local government pays her $0.10 per can and $0.16 for each
bottle. If she wants to earn a total of at least $100 and has collected a total
of 600 cans, what is the minimum number of bottles she would need to
collect to reach her goal?

          250
          270
          300
          420

  20
What is the measure in degrees of ∠X given that AB, AC, CD, and DB are
straight lines and C is the center of the circle?




 21
Jane is watering her garden and spends 5 minutes watering each tree and 2
minutes watering each shrub. If she can spend no more than 30 minutes
watering her garden, which inequality represents the number of T trees and
S shrubs she can water given these constraints?

        5T + 2S ≥ 30
        5T + 2S ≤ 30
        5 × T × S ≤ 30
        5 > 30 × T × S

 22
The price of a video streaming service increases by 15% each year. If the
price, P, of the service begins at v dollars, what is the value of the constant
c in the following function that models the price of the service t years after
it begins?

                                    P = vct
         0.15
         0.85
         1.15
         1.55
Section 2, Module 2: Math
35 MINUTES, 22 QUESTIONS


DIRECTIONS

 All expressions and variables use real numbers.
 All figures are drawn to scale.
 Every figure lies in a plane.
 The domain of given functions is the set of all real numbers for which the corresponding value of
 the function is real.

For multiple-choice questions, solve the problem and pick the correct
answer from the provided choices. Each multiple-choice question has only
one correct answer.
For student-produced response questions, solve each problem and record
your answer following these guidelines:
 If you find more than one correct answer, enter just one answer.
 You can enter up to five characters for a positive answer and up to six characters (this includes the
 negative sign) for a negative answer.
 If your answer is a fraction that does not fit in the given space, enter the decimal equivalent
 instead.
 If your answer is a decimal that does not fit in the given space, enter it by stopping at or rounding
 up at the fourth digit.
 If your answer is a mixed number (like        , enter it as an improper fraction (9/2) or its decimal
 equivalent (4.5).
 Do not enter symbols like a comma, dollar sign, or percent sign.




                                         Examples
REFERENCE




The number of degrees of arc in a circle is 360.
The number of radians of arc in a circle is 2π.
The sum of the measures in degrees of the angles of a triangle is 180.
 1
Density equals mass divided by volume. If density is graphed as a line with
mass corresponding to the y value and the volume corresponding to the x
value, what aspect of the function corresponds to the density of the
substance?

        slope     y-intercept       x-intercept   domain 2
What is the sum of the following polynomials?

                     5 x3 − x + 4    and    6 x3 + x2 − 3
        30 x6 + x3 − x + 1
        30 x3 + 2 x2 + x − 1
        11 x3 + x2 − x + 1
        11 x3 − x2 + x − 1

 3
Which of the following is equivalent to      ?

        0
        1
        2
        6

 4
                                2x − 3y = 7
                                6x + ky = 21
For what value of the constant k will the above system of equations have
infinitely many solutions?

        −9
        −7
         2
         13

 5
What is the y-intercept of the graph of the function y = 2x − 3?

         −3
         −2
         0
         1

 6
Which of the following is an equivalent form of z = x − y?




 7
If x + 3 = y and xy = 40, what is the sum of x and y, given that both x and y
are positive?

         5
         8
         13
         15

 8
The graph of the above line is portrayed by which of the following
equations?

        y=3


        y = 3x     y=x+3

 9
                                2a − 3b = 5
                                3a − 2b = 10
The solution to the above system of equations is (a, b). What is the value of
a − b?
 10
Due to radiation, the mass of a substance decreases by 0.5% every day.
Which type of function would properly model the mass of the substance as
the days go by?

           increasing linear   decreasing linear      increasing exponential
                decreasing exponential 11

 Travel Statistics on Journey from Times Square to Harlem in
                         New York City

                               Estimated Time                   Distance
 Subway                            17 minutes                    5 miles
 Car                               19 minutes                   4.9 miles
 Walk                              93 minutes                   4.6 miles
 Bicycle                           33 minutes                   5.7 miles


If Sarah took the subway from Times Square to Harlem, what was her speed
in miles per hour, to the nearest tenth?

           0.7 mph     3.4 mph      17.6 mph       204.0 mph 12
If x + y = 7 and x − y = 3, what is the value of 3 x2 − 3 y2?




 13
Water from the ocean has 3.5% salt, and water from the Dead Sea has
33.7% salt. If someone has 10 gallons of ocean water, how many gallons of
water from the Dead Sea (measured to the nearest hundredth of a gallon)
need to be added so that the solution has 10% salt?




 14
Which of the following is a solution for x in the equation 4x = 2 − 3 x2?




 15
A function g(x) has values given in the table below:
                   x                                    g(x)
                  −3                                     −1
                  −2                                     0
                  −1                                     2
                   0                                     1
                   1                                     0
                   2                                     3


Which of the following would be a factor of g(x)?

        (x − 1)(x + 2)     (x − 2)(x + 3)    (x + 1)(x − 2)     (x + 2)(x − 2)
          16
Students at a university were surveyed as to whether they wanted a new
library for the university. Out of the 100 students surveyed, 40% said they
wanted a new library. What is justifiable based on this information?

        Of the 100 students surveyed, 40 wanted a new library.
        40% of all people in the university community want a new library.
        Exactly 40 students at the university want a new library.
        No more than 40 university students want a new library.

 17
A circle has the equation (x − a)2 + (y − b)2 = 9, in which a and b are
positive constants. What must the values of a and b be in order for all the x
and y coordinates of the circle to be greater than zero?

        a < 9 and b > 9


        a > 6 and b < 6
        a > 3 and b > 3

 18



The escape velocity for a given spherical body, like a planet or a star, is
given by the above formula, in which G is the gravitational constant, r is the
distance from the center of the body’s mass to the object, and m is the mass
of the spherical body. What is M in terms of the other variables?
 19
A sphere has a volume of 8 cubic feet. What is the volume in cubic feet of a
sphere with twice the radius of the original one?




 20




Which equation would portray the function graphed above?

        y = (x − 2)(x + 4)(x − 1)     y = (x − 4)(x + 2)(x − 1)   y = (x − 4)
         (x − 2)     y = (x + 1)(x + 2) 21
If square ABCD has an area of 36 square units, what is the perimeter of
square WXYZ given that each vertex of square WXYZ bisects the side of
square ABCD that it intersects?

         6

         12


 22
                           h(t) = − 16 t2 + 16t + 10
The function above portrays the height, h, of a projectile t seconds after
being thrown. Which of the following would be the time in seconds at
which the height of the projectile is at its maximum value?
                         ANSWER KEY
                               Diagnostic Test

Section 1

Reading and Writing Module 1

 1.   C
 2.   C
 3.   A 4. D
 5.   C
 6.   D
 7.   C
 8.   D
 9.   A 10. B
11. A 12. B
13. C
14. A 15. C
16. C
17. B
18. A 19. D
20. A 21. C
22. C
23. A 24. C
25. A 26. B
27. B
Reading and Writing Module 2

 1.   B
 2.   A 3. B
 4.   D
 5.   D
 6.   A 7. D
 8.   B
 9.   B
10.   C
11. C
12. A 13. A 14. B
15. A 16. D
17. A 18. A 19. C
20. B
21. B
22. C
23. B
24. A 25. C
26. B
27. D
                       ANSWER KEY
                        Diagnostic Test

Section 2

Math Module 1

 1.   B
 2.   10
 3.   A 4. A 5. B
 6.   B
 7.   B
 8.   6
 9.   3
10.   C
11. D
12. A 13. 2, 3, or 4
14. D
15. A 16. 25
17. C
18. D
19. A 20. 25
21. B
22. C

Math Module 2
 1.   A 2. C
 3.   C
 4.   A 5. B
 6.   B
 7.   C
 8.   A 9. 3
10. D
11. C
12. 63
13. 2.74
14. D
15. A 16. A 17. D
18. C
19. 64
20. B
21. D
22. 0.5 or ½
Digital SAT Scoring Chart
This will give you an approximation of the score you would earn on the
Digital SAT.1 Tally the number of correct answers from the Reading and
Writing section (out of 54) and the Math section (out of 44). Take the total
for each of these and find the corresponding section score in the tables
below.

              Number of Correct          Reading and Writing
             Reading and Writing          Test Score (Out of
             Questions (Out of 54)               800)
                        0                          200
                        1                          210
                        2                          220
                        3                          230
                        4                          240
                        5                          250
                        6                          260
                        7                          270
                        8                          280
                        9                          290
                        10                         300
                        11                         310
                        12                         330
                        13                         340
                        14                         350
                        15                         360
                        16                         380
                        17                         390
                        18                         400
                        19                         410
20   430
21   440
22   460
23   470
24   490
25   500
26   510
27   520
28   530
29   540
30   550
31   560
32   570
33   580
34   590
35   600
36   610
37   620
38   630
39   640
40   650
41   660
42   670
43   680
44   690
45   700
46   710
47   720
48   730
49   740
50   750
51   760
  52                        770
  53                        790
  54                        800


 Number of
Correct Math     Math Section
Questions (Out   Score (Out of
    of 44)           800)
       0              200
       1              220
       2              230
       3              240
       4              250
       5              280
       6              300
       7              320
       8              340
       9              350
       10             360
       11             380
       12             390
       13             400
       14             410
       15             430
       16             440
       17             450
       18             460
       19             480
       20             490
       21             500
       22             510
       23             520
                    Number of
                   Correct Math        Math Section
                   Questions (Out      Score (Out of
                       of 44)              800)
                          24                530
                          25                540
                          26                550
                          27                560
                          28                570
                          29                580
                          30                590
                          31                600
                          32                610
                          33                620
                          34                630
                          35                650
                          36                660
                          37                680
                          38                690
                          39                700
                          40                720
                          41                750
                          42                770
                          43                790
                          44                800


Add the Reading and Writing section score and the Math section score to
find your total SAT test score: _____________ Reading and Writing
Section Score +

_____________ Math Section Score =

_____________ Total SAT Test Score (between 400 and 1600)
Approximate your testing percentiles (1st to 99th) using this chart:2




Test Analysis
Use this guide to determine which skills you should focus on when you
review the chapters. As you go through the test, circle the questions you
missed. This will let you easily identify the areas in which you need to
improve. The test questions that correspond to different skills are organized
below.

Reading and Writing Module 1
Reading: Words in Context: 1, 2, 3, 4, 5
Reading: Structure and Purpose: 6, 7
Reading: Central Ideas and Details: 8, 9
Reading: Cross-Text Connections: 10
Reading: Textual Evidence: 11, 12
Reading: Quantitative Evidence: 13
Reading: Inferences: 14
Writing: Number and Tense: 18, 20, 21
Writing: Punctuation: 15, 16, 17, 19
Writing: Sentence Structure and Organization: 22
Writing: Transitions: 23, 24, 25
Writing: Rhetorical Synthesis: 26, 27

Reading and Writing Module 2
Reading: Words in Context: 1, 2, 3, 4, 5
Reading: Structure and Purpose: 6, 7
Reading: Central Ideas and Details: 8
Reading: Textual Evidence: 9, 10, 11
Reading: Quantitative Evidence: 12, 13
Reading: Inferences: 14, 15
Writing: Punctuation: 16, 17, 18, 19
Writing: Number and Tense: 20, 21, 22
Writing: Transitions: 23, 24
Writing: Rhetorical Synthesis: 25, 26, 27

Math Module 1
Algebra: 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 14, 15, 17
Problem Solving and Data Analysis: 6, 7, 12
Advanced Math: 8, 9, 10, 11, 13, 19, 21, 22
Geometry and Trigonometry: 16, 18, 20

Math Module 2
Algebra: 1, 2, 4, 6, 7, 8, 9
Problem Solving and Data Analysis: 10, 11, 13, 16
Advanced Math: 3, 5, 12, 14, 15, 18, 20, 22
Geometry and Trigonometry: 17, 19, 21

Diagnostic Self-Assessment
Check any areas you feel you need to work on.
Reading
    Reading timing
    Overthinking Reading questions
    Not sure how to think through Reading questions
    Careless errors on Reading questions
    Other issues?

Writing
    Writing timing
    Writing grammar review
    Overthinking Writing questions
    Not sure how to think through Writing questions
    Careless errors on Writing questions
    Other issues?

Math
    Math timing
    Math formula and concept review
    Overthinking Math questions
    Not sure how to think through Math questions
    Careless errors on Math questions
    Other issues?

General
    Test anxiety and testing mindset issues?
Answer Explanations
Section 1, Module 1: Reading and Writing
 1. (C) “Building” is the most appropriate word in this context to describe
    the process of accumulating wealth. The other words are all more
    associated with the physical construction of items and are not used to
    describe the wealth creation process.

 2. (C) “Lowers” would be the most appropriate word to describe the
    monetary value of a neighborhood changing. “Quiets” and “muffles”
    are typically used with sounds, and “recedes” with erosion or
    physically moving away from something.
 3. (A) “Aptitude” refers to natural skill or ability, so this would make
    sense given the reference to math and science. Choice (B) does not
    make sense in referring to math and science abilities, and choices (C)
    and (D) are overly casual given the more formal tone of the text.
 4. (D) “Avenues” can mean potential “paths” that one could take to
    becoming a culinary professional—it does not have to mean a literal
    road. The other options are commonly used to refer to actual roads
    and do not have the potential double meaning that “avenue” has.

 5. (C) The eggs are unable to be affected by regular pest control
    methods, making “impervious” the most appropriate option. The other
    options would all mean that the eggs could actually be affected by
    these pest control methods.
 6. (D) The poem uses language to convey that “fate” will not “impede
    my steps,” and that the narrator will “rise” and “stride” to show a
    sense of resolution. Thus, choice (D) makes the most sense. It is not
    choice (A) because the narrator is taking action instead of giving in to
    frustration. It is not (B) because the narrator is overcoming obstacles
    instead of merely accepting them. It is not (C) because the narrator is
    using travel metaphorically instead of literally.
 7. (C) The text states that government leaders will take too long to
    analyze civil rights problems, declaring that they need to be studied
    thoroughly, and that only then can some course of action be taken.
    Therefore, the author suggests that opponents of civil rights progress
    will use excessive delay to achieve their aims. There is no mention of
    personal attacks in this text, making choice (A) incorrect. And choices
    (B) and (D) are incorrect because they are goals that those in favor of
    civil rights progress would likely seek, not goals of those opposed to
    civil rights progress.

 8. (D) The text mentions that Marija knew only the word “job,” and even
    this word was very difficult for her to learn. Her English fluency,
    therefore, is “very limited.”

 9. (A) The text gives blunt language as to how the narrator understands
    priests in the story: “eyeless” and “sour-favoured” individuals with
    “suffocated anger.” So, he would describe them as repressing
    emotions, not celebrating or expressing them. Choice (C) doesn’t
    work because the narrator thinks the anger is still present, just
    suffocated. Choices (B) and (D) convey the opposite of the intended
    meaning.

10. (B) Text 1 focuses on the thought process involved in determining
     interpersonal attraction while only briefly mentioning biological
     chemicals. Text 2, on the other hand, describes the actual chemistry of
     the attraction process far more in-depth, mentioning the specific
     neurotransmitters involved and the brain’s chemical messaging.
     Therefore, choice (B) makes the most sense. It is not (A) because Text
     1 does cite the role of chemicals, although it does not go into detail. It
     is not (C) because there are three steps mentioned in Text 2. It is not
     (D) because this would describe Text 1 instead of Text 2.

11. (A) The passage states that because plastic is not biodegradable, it can
     take several hundred years to degrade. Thus, if the plastic from a few
     decades ago had been disposed of in the ocean, it is most likely that
     “nearly all of it would remain.” The other options would suggest a
     greater degree of plastic biodegradability.
12. (B) This selection remarks on America’s general contribution to the
     world and gives evidence of what Du Bois sees as its attention to
     “vigor” (strength and determination) and “ingenuity” (inventiveness
     and insight) over beauty. Choice (A) illustrates the impact the sorrow
     songs had on Du Bois. Choice (C) discusses how some songs were
     lost or forgotten. Choice (D) concludes Du Bois’s ideas on the lasting
     effect and significance of the songs.
13. (C) The previous sentence ends by referring to protists, so it is logical
     that the final sentence of the text would continue this reference. Also,
     the graph shows that since 1675, approximately 200,000 species of
     protists have been discovered. It is not (A) because the line for “all
     species” is greater than that for just “protists,” making it impossible to
     know how many animal species have been found. It is not (B) because
     there is no specific evidence in the graph as to the number of
     experiments conducted. It is not (D) because there is no specific
     evidence that the line for “all species” is composed of only protists
     and plants.
14. (A) The text refers to Haeckel in very positive terms, citing his many
     significant accomplishments. Therefore, it is logical to state that he is
     a historical figure who is worth studying. It is not (B) because Haeckel
     died in 1919 according to the text. It is not (C) because this is far too
     negative. It is not (D) because there is no evidence in the text about
     Haeckel’s literary and poetic accomplishments, so it would not make
     sense to introduce them here.
15. (C) Use a comma to separate the introductory phrase from the
     complete sentence that follows. A semicolon or colon will not work,
     as in choices (A) and (B) since there is not a complete sentence
     beforehand. No comma whatsoever, as in (D), would not allow for a
     needed pause.
16. (C) To be consistent with the use of “we” in the previous sentence, you
     should use “our.” You can therefore eliminate choices (B) and (D)
     since they use “their.” You can also eliminate choice (A). It fails to
     show that the “planet” possesses the “surface” because it lacks an
     apostrophe followed by an “s.” That leaves you with choice (C) as the
     correct answer. It properly uses “our” to be consistent with the
     previous sentence and “planet’s” to demonstrate that the singular
     planet possesses the surface.

17. (B) Do not separate the subject “the great majority of species” from
     the verb “were recorded.” The other options incorrectly separate the
     subject from the verb.

18. (A) We need a possessive to serve as a stand-in for “quantum
     superposition,” which is a singular noun. “Its” is the best substitute for
     quantum superposition’s. Choices (B) and (D) are not possessive, and
     choice (C) refers to multiple people or things: quantum superposition
     is one thing.
19. (D) “Great Men, by all accounts” is a parenthetical statement. If you
     remove it from the sentence, the clause still functions well. The
     general rule with parenthetical statements is that there can be either
     two commas or two dashes separating the statement from the rest of
     the sentence. Choice (B) is close, but it starts with a dash and
     concludes with a comma, which breaks with parallelism.
20. (A) “Are” is the only plural verb out of the options. A plural verb is
     necessary to match with the plural subject of “two of the primary
     positions.” The other options are all singular verbs.
21. (C) “Rose” is the correct past tense version of the verb “rise,” making
     its use consistent with the other past tense verb in the sentence,
     “began.” “Rise” is present tense, “risen” is used in conjunction with
     “have” or “had,” and “rised” is not the proper past tense conjugation
     for the irregular verb “to rise.”

22. (C) Choices (A) and (B) have inverted word order, and choice (D) is
     too vague. Choice (C) puts the words in a logical sequence and uses
     precise wording.

23. (A) “While” is the only option that gives a contrast between the first
     part of the sentence that mentions the nice alignment or contrast of
     some musical waves and the second part of the sentence that mentions
     waves that do not align or contrast in a regular fashion. Choices (B),
     (C), and (D) show a cause-and-effect relationship.

24. (C) Choice (C) logically leads to the example that clarifies a type of
     engineering that deals with a particular type of physical problem. The
     other options would not lead into a clarifying example.

25. (A) “If” sets up a logical relationship between the two parts of the
     sentence: If the restorationist “art restorer” is not skilled, the result is
     that the restoration attempt can be a disaster. The other transitions
     would not set up this logical relationship. Even though “because” and
     “since” can express cause and effect, they would not work because
     they would show that this is a definitive situation rather than a
     possibility.

26. (B) The student wants to introduce Robert Frost to an audience
     unfamiliar with his work. Choice (B) provides a broad description of
     Frost’s identity and overall style, making it the most effective answer.
     Choice (A) does not focus on Frost himself. Choice (C) refers to Frost
     only in passing. Choice (D) does not discuss Frost whatsoever.
27. (B) The third bullet implies that it is correcting a misconception by
     stating “flying squirrels do not actually fly.” Thus, choice (B) does the
     best job out of these options in correcting this misconception. It is not
     (A) because there is no indication that this is a misconception. It is not
     (C) because there is no mention of hunting in the text. It is not (D)
     because the first bullet states that flying squirrels are “numerous.”

Section 1, Module 2: Reading and Writing
 1. (B) Vacation is supposed to replenish and relax you, but it had an
    opposite result. Words like “despised” and “depressed” make it easy to
    guess at Jim’s condition—he is feeling “dispirited.” “Although” is a
    contrasting word, so how he feels must contradict his getting to work
    early and prepared. Choices (A), (C), and (D) are antonyms of what
    the writer is trying to convey.
2. (A) “Value” is synonymous with “worth,” indicating that education
   has an intrinsic “value” or “worth.” It is not “price” because this
   would be associated with something that can be bought or sold, not
   necessarily something that has worth for its own sake. “Principles”
   and “standard” would not be synonymous with “worth.”
3. (B) The text expresses that the fireworks are not intended to be
   anything harmful, and the intention is instead for them to patriotic.
   Going along with the text, “nefarious” would make the most sense
   since it would convey something that would be ill-intentioned. It is not
   (A) or (C) because these convey positive feelings. It is not (D)
   because this would be an apt description of someone’s desire to
   deceive, but not an apt description of the mindset behind detonating
   fireworks.

4. (D) The text expresses that selectivity is needed for chemists to use the
   products of their reaction, and that the process allows them to separate
   one product from another. Put another way, the products of the
   reactions are “isolated,” making choice (D) correct. The other options
   do not convey a separation of chemical products.
5. (D) “Evolving” is used to describe the process by which molecules
   gradually give off heat in the microwave, so “generating” would best
   capture this meaning. While the other options do give possible
   definitions of “evolving,” they do not reflect the process of giving off
   heat.

6. (A) The text addresses the pros and cons of the presidential model,
   making (A) correct. Choice (B) is not accurate because the
   parliamentary model is not analyzed in any way like the presidential
   model. (C) is imprecise because it provides details of the text but does
   not encompass the perceived disadvantages as well as the benefits.
   Choice (D) is wrong because it doesn’t give specific examples of
   countries following this system in the text.

7. (D) The text gives possible explanations for why we have not
   encountered ETI’s even if they do exist. There is no evidence as to the
     author’s opinion, as in (A). Choices (B) and (C) are incorrect because
     neither a recommendation nor suggestion is given in these lines.
 8. (B) The poem explicitly states “I am called pumpkins,” and uses
    pumpkin imagery like “orange” and “jack-o’-lantern” to convey the
    identity. The other options are briefly mentioned in passing, but do not
    have the same supporting evidence as pumpkin does.
 9. (B) This option shows that the government was structured in such a
    way that it led to paralysis because the council could not come to a
    consensus and each nation went its own separate way with decision
    making. It is not (A) because this identifies a strength, not a
    shortcoming. It is not (C) or (D) because these choices look at the
    historical legacy of the Iroquois instead of analyzing their
    government.
10. (C) The text describes a “mutualist” relationship, in which the species
     help one another. This is most like the oxpecker birds’ eating the
     predatory insects off the backs of zebras, since the oxpeckers are
     gaining food, and the zebras are being cleaned. Choices (A) and (D)
     involve relationships only beneficial to one of the species, and choice
     (B) does not establish a reciprocal relationship with another species.
11. (C) This option focuses on how the occupational therapist can
     establish trust and support, which would be associated with
     collaboration. Choice (A) focuses on dysfunctional occupations
     instead of on collaboration. Choice (B) focuses on the replacement of
     dysfunctional occupations with functional ones but does not highlight
     collaboration. Choice (D) focuses on what a patient can do on their
     own to minimize stress but does not integrate the occupational
     therapist in this process.
12. (A) H5N1 and H7N9 have the very highest fatality rates of any of the
     illnesses presented in the table. However, the case numbers for each of
     these viruses were only in the hundreds. Other less lethal illnesses in
     the table causes far greater numbers of infection. These two viruses
     would therefore provide the most effective support to the virologist’s
     hypothesis that if the flu virus has too high a fatality rate, it will not
     ultimately cause many cases. The other options do not show such a
     relationship.

13. (A) We can see in the table that men have higher rates of crash
     involvement than women in every age range. It therefore might be
     argued that car safety engineers should focus on male safety more as
     males are the ones who more often need to be saved. This would be
     against what the researcher believes but could be supported with the
     data. This makes choice (A) the best option. The text does not discuss
     age-related safety, so choices (B) and (C) would be incorrect as they
     do not argue against the researcher. Choice (D) would support the
     researcher’s position, not providing an argument against it, and is
     therefore incorrect.
14. (B) The earlier part of the sentence says that Newlands was
     “vindicated,” which means he was proven correct. Choice (B) would
     demonstrate that his theory was indeed correct, since his theory
     suggested that the elements would follow an eight-element pattern.
     The other options would not demonstrate how Newlands was proven
     correct.
15. (A) The text advocates that doctors should not overprescribe
     antibiotics so that antibiotic-resistant bacteria will not form. By
     minimizing over-prescription, the antibiotics have a greater chance of
     remaining effective for those who most need them, aligning with
     choice (A). The other options represent outcomes that conflict with
     the ideas expressed in the text.
16. (D) Choice (D) correctly places commas around the parenthetical
     phrase that clarifies the scientific term. Choices (A) and (B) do not
     punctuate around the parenthetical phrase, while (C) uses inconsistent
     punctuation around the phrase.

17. (A) Choice (A) provides a comma between the dependent introductory
     clause and the independent clause that follows. Choice (B) does not
     have a complete sentence before the colon. Choice (C) does not have a
     complete sentence before the semicolon. Choice (D) unnecessarily
     uses a series of dashes to interrupt the phrasing of the sentence.

18. (A) Choice (A) uses a comma both before and after the parenthetical
     phrase like other grains, correctly setting this clarifying phrase aside.
     Choice (B) does not have a comma at the end of the phrase. Choice
     (C) incorrectly uses the plural verb “were.” And choice (D) is
     inconsistent in the punctuation used before and after the parenthetical
     phrase.

19. (C) Notice the parallelism of listing: as each item in the list has a
     comma inside the item, it is proper to separate the items using
     semicolons. Choices (B) and (D) do not have the proper structure.
     Now notice the comma after each state in the previous items. Choice
     (A) omits that comma after “Arizona.” Additionally, choice (A) makes
     use of “it’s,” meaning “it is,” where the correct answer should use the
     possessive form “its.”

20. (B) The subject that corresponds to the verb is the singular word
     “research.” Choice (B) correctly uses the present tense and a singular
     verb. Choice (A) is plural, and choice (C) is not in the present tense.
     While “has” as used in choice (D) would indicate the present perfect
     tense, the word “suggesting” is the improper conjugation of “to
     suggest” in the present perfect form.

21. (B) “Are” is consistent with the plural subject “paintings” and matches
     the other verbs by being in the present tense. The other choices are all
     singular verbs.
22. (C) “Makes it” is most appropriate since the sentence is making the
     declaration that it is more difficult for the servals to be spotted. Also,
     “makes” is consistent with the singular “having a lighter-colored
     coat.” Choices (A) and (D) do not match up numerically with the
     subject, and (B) would not work in terms of making a declaration.
23. (B) This transition refers to the relationship between the first and
     second clauses in this sentence, where the first clause is the cause, and
     the second clause is the effect. In essence, “because” of clause one,
     then clause two. Choice (A) leaves the sentence disjointed and lacking
     fluidity. Choice (C) is used to introduce simultaneous (but often
     contradictory) clauses, while (D) is also generally a lead-in for two
     actions occurring at the same time.
24. (A) “Since” is the only option that provides the cause-and-effect
     transition needed between the fact that a microscopic analysis is
     needed to do a CTE diagnosis and the need to wait for such analysis
     until after a patient has died.

25. (C) Choice (C) is the only option that makes a generalization about the
     early sponsors of ballet. Based on the notes, these early sponsors were
     Italian and French queens and kings. Choices (A) and (B) are too
     specific, and choice (D) is a generalization about gender
     representation in ballet as opposed to the early ballet sponsors.
26. (B) The notes specifically suggest that causes of hearing loss could be
     the result of blockage in the ear canal or exposure to loud noises.
     Choice (B) gives examples of how someone could apply this specific
     advice to the real world. It is not (A) because this does not give a
     specific way that someone can avoid hearing loss. It is not (C) because
     this talks about the population more vulnerable to hearing loss. It is
     not (D) because it is too vague.

27. (D) The student wants to take the information from the notes and come
     up with a cause that would fit the goals of Effective Altruism. Based
     on the notes, a cause like this should be solvable, specific, data-driven,
     and efficient. Raising money to remove poisonous lead-based paints
     from school facilities in an impoverished city would align with these
     goals, since it is a problem that could be solved by removing the paint
     and is highly targeted on a clear objective. It is not (A) because this
     sort of goal is overly imprecise. It is not (B) because this is not an
     overlooked charitable cause since it can reasonably be inferred that the
     museum already has extensive facilities and art pieces. It is not (C)
     because this does not specify a cause but instead focuses on the
     training needed to evaluate a cause.
Section 2, Module 1: Math
 1. (B)




 2. (10)




 3. (A) For a line to be totally vertical, the line must have a constant value
    for x. x = − 5 works because no matter what the value of y would be,
    the value of x will always be −5. Here is what x = −5 looks like when




    graphed:

    y = −4 represents a horizontal line, and the other options are neither
    horizontal nor vertical.
4. (A)



    Now that we know x = 24, divide 24 by 8 to get the solution:



5. (B) Put the equation in slope-intercept form: y = mx + b The y-
   intercept is 0, and the slope is 3—calculate the slope either by
   visualizing the rise over the run, or by plugging in points to the slope
   formula. You can use the points (0, 0) and (2, 6):
     The mass corresponds to the y value and the v corresponds to the x
     value. So, the equation will then be m = 3v.
 6. (B) The numbers are already in order from least to greatest. Since
    there is an even number of terms and the two middle terms are
    different from one another, take the average of the two middle terms, 7
     and 9, to find the median of the set:
 7. (B) Convert from teaspoons, to tablespoons, and then to cups.




 8. (6) Subtract the calories of the cheese and vegetables from the total
    calories for the salad to find how many calories come from salad
    dressing: 1, 100 − 650 = 450
     Now, divide 450 by 75 to find the number of salad dressing packets
     used:
                                450 ÷ 75 = 6
     So, 6 packets of salad dressing were used.
 9. (3)




10. (C) If there is a 30% discount, the new price of the product is 100% −
     30% = 70% of the original price. Since the original price is p, take
     70% of p. Move the decimal point on 70 to the left two spots, giving
     you 0.7. Then multiply it by p for the solution: 0.7p.
11. (D) Distance is represented by r in the equation. Double the r to see



     how the overall force would change:
     So, the force would change such that it is of the original force.
12. (A) There are a total of 188 people in the table. Out of these 188, there
     are 40 male cat owners. So, divide 40 by 188 to get the probability
     that a randomly selected pet owner would be a male cat owner:

13. (2, 3, or 4) Any one of these numbers would work as a solution. This
     is easiest to solve by plugging in some possible numbers. If Connor
     purchases 2 cheeseburgers for $10, he will need to purchase 3, 4, or 5
     hamburgers to be within the $20–$30 range. If Connor purchases 3
     cheeseburgers for $15, he will need to purchase 2, 3, or 4 hamburgers
     to be in the range. If he purchases 4 cheeseburgers for $20, he could
     purchase 2 hamburgers to be in the range. And if he purchases more
     than 4 cheeseburgers, he will fall outside the range since he must
     purchase at least 2 hamburgers.
14. (D)
                             12 < − 4x + 6y →
     Divide everything by 2 to simplify:
                              6 < − 2x + 3y →
     Get y by itself →
                               6 + 2x < 3y →

     Divide both sides by 3 →



15. (A)
     Given that the line has both a positive slope and a positive y-intercept,
     the line must be above the x axis for values of x greater than 0. So,
     choices (B), (C), and (D) will not work since they would fall on or
     underneath the x-axis for values of x greater than 0. Choice (A) would
     work because it is already above the x-axis even when it has a
     negative value for x. A line with the point (−4, 5) could continue with
     a positive slope to also have a positive y-intercept.
16. (25) The triangle can be drawn as follows:




     Solve for the unknown side by using the Pythagorean theorem:
     So, the side AC = 25. Alternatively, you can recognize that this is a
     Pythagorean triple that you could have memorized: 7–24–25.
17. (C) Plug in a number for k to visualize the situation. Suppose that k is
     equal to 3. Then, the function would be f(x) = 3. The function would




     look like this:
     Condition 1 fits since the function is a line. Condition 2 fits since the
     function is flat and has a slope of zero. Condition 3 does not fit
     because the domain (corresponds to x values) goes from positive to
     negative infinity, but the range (corresponds to y values) is only 3. So,
     just conditions 1 and 2 will apply.
18. (D) The smallest edge is 2 cm, the next greatest edge will be 4 cm, and
     the greatest edge will be 6 cm. The prism will look like this:
     There are two sides with dimensions 2 × 4, two sides with dimensions
     4 × 6, and two sides with dimensions 2 × 6. So, add these surfaces
     areas together to find the total surface area of the prism:




19. (A) Use a as the number of aluminum cans and g as the number of
     glass bottles to create an inequality expressing that the total money
     made is at least $100.
                              0.1a + 0.16g ≥ 100

     Then, substitute 600 in for a, since we know that she has collected 600




     cans, and solve for g:

     So, the least possible value for the number of bottles would be 250.
20. (25) ∠X is an inscribed angle that is across from an intercepted arc that
     measures 50 degrees. The rule is that an inscribed angle is half the
     length of the intercepted arc, so take half of 50 to get 25 degrees. You
     could also estimate this value from the drawing since the figure is
     drawn to scale.
21. (B) The number of minutes spent watering each tree is 5, and the
     number of minutes water each shrub is 2. So, find the total number of
     minutes spent watering the sum of the plants by multiplying the
     number of each plants by the amount of time each plant type is
     watered: 5T + 2S
     This total must be no more than 30 minutes, meaning it can be less
     than or equal to 30 minutes. Putting this all together, you have this
     expression: 5T + 2S ≤ 30

22. (C) Use the formula for compound interest: A = Future Value
     P = Initial Value (Principal)
     r = Interest Rate Expressed as a Decimal (r is positive if increasing,
     negative if decreasing) t = Time
     n = Number of Times Interest is Compounded over Time Period t



     Applying this formula to the problem, v would be the initial value, and
     t would be the number of years. The constant c corresponds to the part
     in parentheses:     . Since the price increases 15% each year, the
     number of times that it is compounded is just one. So, turn 15% into a
     decimal to determine what will equal:
     So, the constant c will equal 1.15.

Section 2, Module 2: Math
 1. (A) Since the slope is defined as the change in y divided by the change
    in x, and since the mass corresponds to the y value and the v
    corresponds to the x value, the slope will equal the density of the
    substance.
 2. (C)
3. (C)
4. (A) For the equations to have infinitely many solutions, the two
   equations should be multiples of each other.
                                2x − 3y = 7
                               6x + ky = 21

    The second equation is three times that of the first equation, since 21
    is three times 7 and 6 is three times 2. So, k should be three times −3,
    which is −9.

5. (B) The y-intercept is the point at which the function intersects the y-
   axis—the value of x at this point must be 0. So, plug 0 in for x to the
   equation to solve for the y-intercept (keep in mind that a number to the
   zero power is equal to 1): y = 2x − 3 → y = 20 − 3 → 1 − 3 = −2
6. (B) Choice (B) is the only option that will eliminate terms when it is
   simplified, allowing it to look like z = x − y:




    You could also think about the above calculation as the difference of
    squares: after FOILing the expression, the outer and inner terms
    cancel, leaving you with just the first and last terms.
7. (C) Start by substituting x + 3 in for y to the second equation: x(x + 3)
   = 40

    Now, solve for x:
     Since the question states that both x and y must be positive, use 5 as
     the value of x. Then, plug 5 in to the first equation to solve for y: x + 3
     =y→5+3=8=y

     Now, find the sum of x and y by adding their values together:
                                  8 + 5 = 13
 8. (A) The line is horizontal, with every value of x giving the same value
    of y: 3. So, the equation of the line is y = 3.

 9. (3) Notice a pattern here—if you add the two equations together, you
    will be able to simplify the expression so that you can solve for a − b.




     Then, divide the whole equation by 5, and you will have the needed
     expression:



     Thus, a − b is equal to 3.

10. (D) You can eliminate choices (A) and (C) since the mass is going
     down. And you can eliminate choice (A) because the mass is not
     decreasing at a steady, linear rate. So, the answer is (D) because the
     mass is both decreasing and doing so at an exponential rate.
11. (C) Sarah traveled 5 miles for 17 minutes. So, convert 5 miles per 17
     minutes to miles per hour:
12. (63) Since (x + y)(x − y) = x2 − y2, substitute 7 and 3 in for these
     expressions and multiply the product by 3 to arrive at the answer:


13. (2.74) Set up an equation that uses x as the number of gallons of Dead
     Sea water that would be needed to add to the 10 gallons of ocean
     water to get water with a percent of salt at 10%. The 3.35% is
     expressed as 0.035 and the 33.7% is expressed as 0.337 since you
     move the decimal point to the right two spots when calculating
     percentages. The 10 + x represents the total number of gallons.




14. (D) Looking ahead to the format of the answers, it appears that the
     quadratic formula will be used to solve for this. Start by putting the

     equation in quadratic form:

     Now, use the quadratic equation to solve for x:
     Out of the two solutions,             is the only one given, making (D)
     correct.

15. (A) Factors of the function can be found at the x-intercepts. Look for
     the x values where g(x) is equal to 0: −2 and 1. Then, see which option
     would make it so that plugging these two numbers in would result in a
     value of 0. The only option is choice A. (x − 1)(x + 2) 16. (A) Since
     we do not know if the students who participated in the survey were
     randomly selected, we can only reasonably generalize as to the
     opinions of those who participated in the survey. So, we can justify the
     statement that out of the 100 students surveyed, 40 wanted a new
     library. It is not (B) because we cannot generalize as to the opinions of
     all university community members based on this non-randomized
     sample. And it is not (C) or (D) because these options confuse the
     sample percentage with the number of students.
17. (D) The radius of the circle will be 3 since the square root of 9 is 3. So,
     the values of a and b must each be greater than 3 so that all the
     coordinates of the circle will be greater than zero—this will place the
     circle in the first quadrant, as modeled in the graph below:




18. (C) Manipulate the equation so that M is isolated.
19. (64) Write an equation for the original sphere:
     A sphere with a radius of twice this original one would have a radius
     of 2r. Calculate the value of this new sphere in terms of r:


     So, the volume of the new sphere is 8 times the volume of the original
     sphere: 8 × 8 = 64 cubic feet.

20. (B) The graph of the function intersects the x-axis at −2, 1, and 4. So,
     see which equation would have those as zeros, i.e., plugging in these
     numbers would cause the value of the function to equal zero. The only
     one that has all three of these numbers as zeros is y = (x − 4)(x + 2)(x
     − 1) 21. (D) Since the area of the square is 36 square units, the length
     of each side will be the square root of 36: 6. Label the drawing to
     visualize the side lengths and notice that 45-45-90 triangles are
     inscribed in the larger square, since each side is bisected by a vertex of
     the inner square.
       Add the four sides of square WXYZ to find its perimeter:



22.              Solve for the vertex of the parabola, since at that point the
       projectile will reach its maximum. Use the formula        to find the
       time at which it will reach its maximum. The function h(t) = −16t 2 +
       16t + 10 is already in quadratic form, so you can see the values needed

       for a and for b. Use for a and 16 for b:



1Keep in mind that some of the questions on an actual SAT test will be research questions that will
not count towards your actual score. For the sake of simplicity, we are including possible research
questions in your calculation.
2 Scoring Data based on information at collegeboard.org
PART 3
Reading
Reading for the Digital SAT

Overview of the SAT Reading Modules
The SAT Reading tests your ability to analyze reading passages,
appropriately use vocabulary, and determine supporting evidence in a wide
variety of texts: fiction, historical documents, poetry, natural science, social
science, drama, and more. No matter your choice of college major or career,
it will be important to be skilled in interpreting written material and
graphics. While you will not need any specific background knowledge of
the passage topics, the more widely and deeply you have read, the easier the
SAT Reading questions will be for you.

SAT Reading Structure
Here is the breakdown of the adaptive testing modules:

                      SAT Reading and Writing Modules
 Reading and Writing One                 32 Minutes, 27 Questions, Standard Difficulty
 Reading and Writing Two                 32 Minutes, 27 Questions, Adaptive Difficulty
                                         (easier or harder questions depending on how
                                         you did on the first Reading/Writing section)


       Reading and Writing texts are no longer than 150 words.
       Each text has just one question accompanying it.
       The reading questions come first within each module, followed by
       the writing questions.
       Approximately 29 of the 54 total SAT Reading and Writing questions
       are reading ones.
       Out of these roughly 29 questions, the specific reading question types
       are likely to be in this order and allocated as follows (based on the
      released SAT tests from College Board):

                             Likely Percentage
                                of Reading
   Question Type                 Questions                   Example
    Words in Context               34%           Which choice completes the text
                                                 with the most logical and precise
                                                 word or phrase?
  Structure and Purpose            12%           Which choice best states the main
                                                 purpose of the text?
 Cross-Text Connections             3%           Based on the texts, how would the
                                                 researcher in Text 2 most likely
                                                 describe the view of the theorists
                                                 presented in Text 1?
 Central Ideas and Details          11%          Which choice best states the main
                                                 idea of the text?
  Quantitative Evidence             11%          Which choice most effectively uses
                                                 data from the table to complete the
                                                 example?
    Textual Evidence               17%           Which quotation from the text most
                                                 effectively illustrates the claim?
        Inferences                 12%           Which choice most logically
                                                 completes the text?


      Within each of the above question types, the difficulty of the
      questions will generally progress from easy to hard. For example,
      the Words in Context questions will gradually become more difficult
      and then when you start the Structure and Purpose questions, the
      difficulty will again progress from easy to hard, and so on. This
      ordering of the questions is helpful for you as a test-taker, since you
      will get used to a particular question style before taking on the more
      difficult questions of that type.


General SAT Reading Strategies
1. Realize that the SAT is not the type of test you are used to. If you
approach the SAT Reading section in the same way you approach a school-
based assignment that assesses text recall, you will have some major
difficulty. Here are some fundamental differences in how you should tackle
typical tests and the SAT Reading:

   Typical School-Based Reading
               Tests                                               SAT Reading
 The tests are almost always closed-book, so         The SAT is open-book—you don’t have to
 you need to read and reread to be certain you       know anything ahead of time or memorize the
 remember everything that might be tested.           text. You can go back to the text as often as
                                                     you need.
 Test questions are often about specific facts, so   Test questions are more often about inference,
 it is vital that you memorize details and           purpose, and big ideas, so focus on general
 definitions as you read.                            paraphrasing instead of specific memorizing.
 Occasionally, there are mistakes on a test with     SAT questions are very well written, and there
 a couple of right answers to a question. It is      will be just one correct answer to each
 easy for a question to be thrown out if there is    question. The College Board does not want to
 an error.                                           throw out the results for hundreds of thousands
                                                     of test-takers, so they invest tremendous
                                                     resources into ensuring that the questions have
                                                     answers that are 100% correct.


If you have told yourself that you are “a bad test-taker,” ask yourself . . .
“Am I taking the SAT in the same way I take a school-based test?” If so, the
problem is not with you but with your strategy.

2. Do not rush. A major shift in the Digital SAT is to make it an easier test
to complete within the time constraints. Most test-takers will find that the
SAT Reading questions are quite manageable to complete.

3. Read at a steady pace, at about 100–120 words per minute. 100–120
words per minute is approximately the pace at which most students talk, so
reading in this way is very doable. There is no need to skim or speed-read.

4. Take approximately 70 seconds on average for each question in the
Reading and Writing section.
Use the countdown clock embedded in the testing program to manage
your time. You can have the countdown clock visible or hidden throughout
the test, except for the last five minutes of the module when it will
automatically display. You can hide the clock if you find it distracting or
leave it open if you find it helpful.
    You will likely do your best if you use the full amount of time to read
the texts well and think through the questions carefully. There is no prize
for finishing early. In fact, if you find yourself finishing the SAT Reading
and Writing modules with time to spare, you may want to try reading the
more challenging texts a couple of times before attempting the questions.
Re-reading can be particularly helpful with texts like poetry where the
meaning is often quite subtle.
    If you do have difficulty finishing the SAT Reading and Writing, you
can pick your battles by focusing on just those questions that come to you
most easily (perhaps the words in context and inferences since they are
typically shorter) and guessing on the questions you do not have time to
attempt, since there is no guessing penalty.

5. Come back to questions if needed. You can flag questions in the testing
program, making it easy to revisit the questions that you skipped. If you
become stuck on a question, come back to it so that you can allow your
subconscious mind to process the possibilities. Once you come back to the
question with fresh eyes, you will often surprise yourself at how well you
can think through it at that point.
    If you know that the reading questions are more difficult for you than the
grammar questions in the same testing module, you could do the grammar
questions first and save the reading questions for later. You could also save
some of the more challenging categories of reading questions to do later,
since the questions progress in a predictable order. Recognize that you are
in control of the order that you answer questions within the testing module,
so answer them in the order that best suits you.

6. You may want to read the question before reading each text. Since
each reading text has just one question that accompanies it, you may find it
easier to focus on what you need to look for if you read the question before
reading the text. This could be especially helpful on questions that ask you
to focus on something more specific in the text: words in context, text
structure and purpose, and textual evidence. On questions that involve
determining the meaning of the passages in a more general way—central
ideas and details, inferences, and cross-text connections—you may want to
go ahead and read the passage before doing the questions. Starting with the
questions before reaching each text can be especially helpful for students in
these situations:

      Students who have a hard time focusing on the text may find
      previewing the questions helpful. They will get a sense of what
      things they should focus on while reading the passage.
      Students who overthink the reading because they want to memorize
      all the details also may want to review the question beforehand.
      Knowing what they will be asked about might help them relax while
      reading, enabling them to focus on the big picture instead of trying to
      remember every fact and figure.

7. Focus on the overall meaning of the text(s) as you read. You should be
able to restate the “gist” of what you have read—don’t worry about
memorizing details from the passage. Before each text, there may be a brief
summary of the author, text source, and authorship date that will give you
some information about what you are about to read. Be sure to read this
summary before reading the actual passage, as it will help you preview the
general meaning of what follows. If any of the topics are unfamiliar or the
passage language seems too lofty, don’t be alarmed. If you carefully read
the passages, you will have the information necessary to answer the
questions well—the SAT makers do not expect you to be a master of all
potential topics and potential writing styles.

8. Read the text actively, not passively. It is easy to let yourself become
distracted or bored when reading a text, such that while your eyes may be
moving across the page, your mind is somewhere else. Keep this from
happening by doing the following:

      Ask questions about the text. The more you ask yourself questions as
      you read, the easier it will be to answer the question you are asked.
Previewing the question before reading can help you if you struggle
with generating your own questions as you read.
Make connections to the text topic. Just as you would try to find
something in common with someone you just met to get to know
them, see what experiences or knowledge you have that can relate to
the topic.
Make predictions about what may come next. Try to anticipate
where a story or an argument is headed, then see if you are correct as
you read further. Look at the introductory information about a text to
make predictions before even starting. On comparative texts,
consider the argument in the first text to make an educated guess
about what the second text may argue before you read it.
Catch yourself if you begin to lose focus. If you read the first couple
of sentences and they didn’t sink in, give the beginning another quick
read. Don’t allow yourself to get halfway through the text having no
idea what is going on.
Paraphrase the text. The more comfortable you are putting the
message of the text in your own words as you read, the easier it will
be for you to answer questions that ask you to paraphrase and analyze
the selection.
Make notations to stay engaged with the passage. You can annotate
the text in the testing application, and you will likely have scrap
paper available on which you can make notes. While you do not need
to take detailed notes as you would if you were preparing for a big
test in school, in which you would have to read lots of material over a
longer period, some small notations and highlights may help you
keep your focus.
You will only need the information that is provided. While having
background knowledge about the reading topic can be helpful,
everything you need to understand the text is right in front of you. If
you read it actively, you will be in excellent shape to answer the
question.
Take mini-breaks to maintain focus. Rather than rushing to the end
of the Reading and Writing module, take a break every few questions
          to let your mind wander for a few seconds so you can maintain your
          attention throughout the test.

Think of active reading like active listening. In your school classes, you
will get much more out of the teacher’s lecture if you connect to what they
are saying and ask questions about the topic. You will be much better
prepared for the test if you are mentally active, not mentally passive, just
mindlessly copying down notes while your mind is on other topics.

9. Adjust how you read based on the type of text. Fiction and poetry are
structured very differently from non-fiction arguments. Change the way you
approach each text to maximize comprehension.

     Type of Text             Types of Questions to Ask to Read Actively
 Fiction                   Which character is speaking right now?
                           What is the sequence of events? Are there any flashbacks?
                           What emotions are being expressed in the story?
 Poetry                    Who is the intended audience?
                           Does any of the language have symbolic meaning?
                           How does the author or narrator seem to be feeling?
 Science (Social and       Is this an argumentative text, and if so, what is their argument?
 Natural)
                           Is this a presentation of scientific findings? What is a summary of
                           the main discoveries?
                           Is the author considering objections? Am I avoiding confusing the
                           author’s position and the position of others?
                           If there are graphs, how do they relate to what is presented in the
                           passage?
 Historical Document       What type of document is this? A speech, a letter, an editorial, or a
                           governmental document?
                           What is the point of this document? Is it to present an argument, or
                           highlight an issue?
                           What are the cultural assumptions in the environment in which the
                           document was written? Does the author suggest different views
                           from modern ones about gender, ethnicity, and social class?
 Text 1 and Text 2         What is the thesis—the main argument—of each passage? What are
                           they trying to show the reader or convince the reader to believe?
     Type of Text          Types of Questions to Ask to Read Actively
                        What is similar about the texts? Do they share any assumptions in
                        terms of facts or opinions?
                        What is different about the texts? What would each author think
                        about the other author’s argument?


10. Fully understand every part of the question. A careless mistake in
reading a question will likely lead to a wrong answer. Instead of quickly
reading through the question, and then having to reread it, read it one time
well. This will ensure that you not miss wording critical to understanding
what the question is asking, such as “hypothesis,” “inferred,” “main idea,”
and so forth. Since questions of a similar type come back-to-back, it is
easier to get into a rhythm of thinking in a certain way for each cluster of
questions. Even though the questions are rather predictable in their likely
wording, since the SAT has the same types of questions over and over, be
sure to take your time to understand what is being asked.

11. Create an answer in your own words before looking at the choices.
On factual recall tests, checking out the answers before you have
formulated an answer can help you narrow it down. With the critical
thinking questions on the SAT, in contrast, you will often find yourself
misled by persuasive but ultimately incorrect answers. Take control of the
questions and don’t let them control you. Try your best to come up with an
idea of the answer before actually looking at the answer choices. When you
do look at the answers, you can mark off each incorrect answer choice one-
by-one using the testing application. Do not “jump” to an answer or
eliminate an answer without patiently thinking through all the possibilities.

12. Go back to the text as often as you need. Most tests we take are
closed-book—the SAT Reading is open-book. If you had an open-book test
in school, you would surely use your textbook and notes to help you answer
the questions. With so many SAT questions giving underlined sentences and
key words, it makes sense to use the text whenever necessary.
13. The answers will be 100% correct or totally wrong. A single word
can contaminate an answer, making it completely wrong. When you narrow
the choices down to two options, don’t just look for the “best” answer—
look for the “flawless” answer. Try to quickly debate with yourself the
correctness or incorrectness of each answer, knowing that there is one that
is definitely correct, and three that are definitely wrong. The College Board
has put a great deal of effort into creating the questions you will see on the
SAT, so you can safely assume they will be of the very highest quality.

14. Focus on meaning, not matching. On ordinary school tests, we are
often used to matching the choices with facts we recall from the assigned
reading or the in-class lecture. On the SAT, the fact that an answer has
wording that matches parts of the text is no guarantee that it is correct.
There is nothing wrong with picking an answer because it does have
wording that is in the passage; just don’t pick an answer only because it has
matching wording. Be certain the overall meaning of an answer gives the
correct idea.

15. Don’t worry about your performance while testing. Since the Digital
SAT is adaptive, the later sections will change in difficulty depending on
your performance on earlier sections. It will do you no good to try to
evaluate how difficult the later section questions are—you will waste time
and energy that could be spent on figuring out the problems in front of you.
Do your best to stay in the moment and not think back about how you
performed on earlier sections. Moreover, be mindful that four of the
Reading and Writing questions you encounter will be experimental and not
scored—if a question seems a bit odd to you, do your best to answer it but
don’t dwell on it.

16. Practice with the testing application ahead of time. You will be able
to download the software that you will use on the actual Digital SAT—go to
collegeboard.org for the latest details on how to do so. You can practice
with this program on your own computer or on one at a library or school.
Familiarize yourself with the software interface—the timer, the question
flagging feature, and the adaptive question style. The program will allow
you to mark off answers you have eliminated and zoom in on the passages
if you want to focus on part of the text. Since the passages are less than 150
words, you should have no difficulty seeing the entirety of the passage on
the screen while you work through the question.

17. Give every question your best shot. With fewer questions on the
Digital SAT, each question has a larger impact on your score. Given the
adaptive nature of the Digital SAT, the questions you will be given on the
later modules are designed to be of a difficulty appropriate for you. Be sure
to give every question your very best effort—do not allow yourself to
become frustrated and quickly guess the answer.

18. When in doubt about your strategy, give the SAT the benefit of the
doubt. On poorly written tests, tricks and gimmicks can help you succeed
—such shortcuts will not help you perform well on the new SAT. The SAT
is an extraordinarily well-constructed assessment based on years of
research. As a result, do not waste your time and energy while taking the
SAT looking for flaws in the test. Instead, give the SAT Reading the benefit
of the doubt and focus on how you can improve your reading
comprehension and critical thinking skills.

Improving Overall Reading Comprehension
In order to strengthen reading skills, it is imperative to read regularly
outside of what you might be assigned for school. The type of reading
materials you select is very important. It should be something that you
enjoy learning about or reading so that you are motivated to continue even
when it is difficult. The reading should be slightly more difficult than what
you are used to in order to strengthen your mental abilities. Improving your
reading comprehension is similar to lifting weights. If you never add more
weight to the bar, you’ll never get stronger. Reading is the same—if you
never read difficult texts, your reading skills won’t improve. On the other
hand, texts that are just slightly above your comfort level will help improve
your abilities so that difficult texts can feel manageable, just like easier
texts are now.
    Below are some resources that you can use to find reading materials that
you enjoy. By using these resources, you will be able to find reading
materials that both interest you and represent the type of material you may
find on the SAT. After the heading for each resource is a summary of how
you can best use it to improve your reading skills. Infinite reading
possibilities may seem overwhelming, so if that ends up being the case,
asking a librarian for help with be your best bet—they can assist you in
developing a short list of books and readings that is tailored for you.
    One final note: if you don’t enjoy the topic you’re reading about, if the
book seems silly and the characters unbearable, or if you just don’t care
about the scientific study the article is covering, just stop. Put it down. Find
something you’re more interested in to read. In personal reading, there is no
requirement to finish books you don’t like. Forcing yourself to do so will
only lead to you to dreading your daily reading time and to finding excuses
to do literally anything else.

Project Gutenberg

https://www.gutenberg.org/
This is an enormous online library full of books that are in the public
domain (public domain means they’re old enough that no one holds
copyrights to them anymore—they can be freely used). There are thousands
of classics stored there. On the main web page, there are options for various
searches. The top 100 list and the bookshelves are very helpful. Top 100
will lead you to a list of books you’ve probably heard of before but never
read. Bookshelves will allow you to explore by genre or topic—if there is a
topic you’re interested in, that would be a good place to start.

Internet Archives
https://archive.org/
The Internet Archives contains more reading material than you could read
in a lifetime! Its self-description is that it’s “a non-profit library of millions
of free books, movies, software, music, websites, and more.” You’ll want to
focus on the books. It’s easy to get lost on this website, so it might be
simplest to stick with just the open library collection. From the main page,
select “books” off the menu and then “open library” from there. At the top
of the open library page, there will be options to browse by subject. You can
also browse selections curated by librarians. Be careful on the Internet
Archives—it’s endless, and you can easily lose a whole afternoon that you
meant to spend studying!


           The open library, at openlibrary.org, has a lot of
           textbooks. If you ever find yourself writing an essay
           and you left your textbook at school, it can be a
           lifesaver!


Library of Congress Archives

https://www.loc.gov/collections/
The above link is to the Library of Congress digital collections. These are
great for practice on historical reading and most other genres. For example,
you can read a selection of papers by Abraham Lincoln, whose writings
may be used on the SAT.

http://www.read.gov/teens/
This second link is to the Library of Congress’s teen page. If browsing the
online digital collection is overwhelming or maybe the content is too
difficult for your reading level, the teen page has a lot of resources to help
you find reading material that might be interesting to you. You can even
email a librarian to ask for suggestions.

Local Library Resources/Phone E-reader

Most communities have a local library—have you ever been to yours? It’s
full of reading materials and employs people who love reading and can help
you find things you’ll love reading too. Go ask your librarian for some
help! Something a lot of people don’t realize is that libraries have done a
great job keeping up with the times. Many are part of online collaborations
that allow patrons to check out just about any book in existence, and often,
those books can be checked out via an app and read entirely on an e-reader
or phone. This allows you to take your reading with you anywhere you go
so that you can get your reading time in between practices, in waiting
rooms, or while stuck in a traffic jam (while someone else is driving, of
course).

School Library

In addition to the local library, you likely also have a school library (which
many schools now call a resource center). While school libraries are often
small, they are in the building where you already spend dozens of hours
each week and so are very accessible. They don’t have just books and
magazines, but also resources geared specifically to students your age. It is
likely that there will also be a librarian there who spends a large portion of
their work time keeping on top of what students like to read so that they can
recommend specific literature that is geared to the interests of the students.
Make friends with this person—they can be a huge help to students looking
for interesting reading materials.

Magazines

If you’re interested in a specific hobby or area of study, magazines are a
resource that are often forgotten. Trade publications and more serious
magazines (TIME, Scientific American, National Geographic, and so on)
are written at a fairly high level. If you’re into robotics, see if you can
subscribe to a robotics magazine—when it’s delivered to your mailbox, it
will remind you to read! You can also read magazines at your local library
or often on their website, but the physical reminder is often nice.

Audiobooks and Podcasts

It can be difficult to find time to sit down and read a good book.
Audiobooks and podcasts are a great way to consume high quality media
while doing something else, like driving in the car, or exercising. The
website www.audible.com has many free audiobooks you can try, and your
public library will have a variety of audiobooks you can borrow. Your
reading comprehension will increase even if you are listening to someone
else read the book but aren’t physically reading the words yourself.

Using This Book to Prepare for the SAT Reading Test?

Review and practice with the specific types of questions that are most
challenging for you on the following pages:
      Words in Context (page 103)
      Structure and Purpose (page 112)
      Cross-Text Connections (page 119)
      Central Ideas and Details (page 124)
      Quantitative Evidence (page 132)
      Textual Evidence (page 150)
      Inferences (page 156)

Study further with practice, starting on page 162, which focus on the types
of questions that are most difficult for you.

Practice with advanced drills, starting on page 171, which present the most
challenging types of reading and questions you might encounter on the SAT.

Review the Vocabulary Resources of 50 word roots and 250 SAT words,
starting on page 180, to bolster your understanding of the most common
challenging words you may come across on the SAT.

Practice with the full-length Reading and Writing tests, carefully watching
your time management.

Good luck!


Words in Context
 Sample Question Language:
     Which choice completes the text with the most logical and precise word or phrase?
     As used in the text, what does the word “compromise” most nearly mean?



How Important Is Vocabulary Study to Success on the SAT
Reading?
The SAT Reading primarily focuses on your ability to decipher the meaning
of words in context. Does this mean you should no longer focus on
memorizing word definitions? Not necessarily. If you do not have a strong
baseline level of vocabulary—you frequently encounter words in the texts
and questions that you do not know—some focused vocabulary
memorization will be useful to you. Also, if English is not your native
language, memorizing words that you will likely encounter on the SAT will
help you improve your score. That is why there is a Vocabulary Resource at
the end of this Reading chapter. It has 50 important word roots and
definitions and examples for 250 common words you may find in SAT
texts. Use these valuable tools to help you build your vocabulary so you no
longer come across words in the texts and the questions you do not
understand.

How can you succeed on Words in Context Questions?
      Create a synonym of your own when asked to complete the text
      with a word or phrase. Having an idea before reviewing the answer
      choices is like having a shopping list before going to the store—you
      will be more decisive and accurate in picking what you need.
      If you do not know what a particular answer option means, do
      not immediately eliminate it as a possibility. When presented with
      a choice between an option you know versus an option you do not
      know, you may typically choose the word you know, even if the
      option is not a good fit. Instead of this approach, realize that
      whatever the correct answer is will work 100%, so even if you do not
      know what a word means, do not eliminate it as a possibility. Instead,
      use the fact that if the other options only partially work, they are
      completely wrong.
       Realize that a word may take on one of its alternative meanings.
       Words usually have several different possible definitions. Be
       mindful that the appropriate meaning for the word in question may
       be the third or fourth most common meaning instead of the first.
       Try plugging in the options to the text to see what is most logical. If
       you are having trouble deciding on a word meaning solution, try
       taking the different options and substituting them for the word.

   Example
     Measles is a highly contagious viral infection, which results, among
     other symptoms, in a rash and high fever. Measles is most dangerous
     to children under five years old, adults over 20 years old, and people
     with __________ immune systems. Complications from measles can
     result in hearing loss, intellectual disability, and respiratory and
     neurological conditions.
     Which choice completes the text with the most logical and precise
     word or phrase?
     (A) dynamic
     (B) compromised
     (C) evolved
     (D) enhanced

   Answer Explanation
Start by reading the entire text carefully. Paraphrasing the text, we
understand that measles is a dangerous illness and can result in serious
complications. Since the text is discussing a disease, we can ask ourselves
what description of an immune system would result in measles being a
significant threat. Create a synonym in your own words; if someone had a
“weak” or “vulnerable” immune system, having a measles infection would
present a greater challenge than it would to people who have strong
immune systems. Now, we can evaluate the choices. “Dynamic” is a
positive word, indicating that the person would be full of energy—this does
not fit the needed meaning. “Evolved” and “enhanced” are also positive
words, showing that the immune system goes beyond the typical
capabilities of what might be found in a human. “Compromised,” choice
(B), makes the most sense, since one of the definitions of “compromised” is
“weakened.” Although this is not the most typical definition of the word, it
is a definition nonetheless—be flexible as you consider the possible
meanings of the words.

Practice Questions
 1. I expect that people are so reluctant to register to become organ donors
     primarily because of the anonymity of the people one would be
     saving. When dealing with strangers, the whole concept is more
     abstract and __________, because you haven’t seen the suffering of
     those you would help.
     Which choice completes the text with the most logical and precise
     word or phrase?
      (A) concrete
      (B) substantial
      (C) comprehensive
      (D) impersonal
 2. Colony collapse disorder (CCD) is an issue that has, over the last ten
    years, caused a __________ amount of concern as to the feasibility of
    the continued bee population in North America. Fruit and vegetable
    crops are pollinated by bees. Should the bee population drop
    drastically, the availability of these healthy options would be
    dramatically reduced.
     Which choice completes the text with the most logical and precise
     word or phrase?
      (A) minimal
      (B) skeptical
      (C) grave
    (D) draconian
3. Teenagers spend a significant portion of their time on social media,
   and they don’t know any differently. This cohort consists of the guinea
   pigs of one of the biggest communications revolutions of all time. As
   they grow and change, their brains can be studied to see how this
   constant __________ online social communication affects them.
   Which choice completes the text with the most logical and precise
   word or phrase?
    (A) admission to
    (B) dearth of
    (C) ignorance of
    (D) exposure to
4. C. diff is an often fairly __________ bacteria that is sometimes found
   in humans and can be picked up from the environment. In small
   amounts and balanced with other bacteria that keep it under control,
   C. diff can be carried by humans without serious repercussions to
   health.
   Which choice completes the text with the most logical and precise
   word or phrase?
    (A) deleterious
    (B) innocuous
    (C) subversive
    (D) organic
5. Poor sleep impacts many body systems. Of particular interest to
   adolescents, and their parents, is the __________ effect of poor sleep
   on academic performance. Lack of sleep makes it difficult to focus on
   lectures and classwork.
   Which choice completes the text with the most logical and precise
   word or phrase?
    (A) detrimental
    (B) benevolent
    (C) dishonest
    (D) dissenting
6. The following text is from Upton Sinclair’s 1906 novel The Jungle.
   The stench was almost overpowering, but to Jurgis it was nothing. His
   whole soul was dancing with joy—he was at work at last! He was at
   work and earning money! All day long he was figuring to himself. He
   was paid the fabulous sum of seventeen and a half cents an hour; and
   as it proved a rush day and he worked until nearly seven o’clock in the
   evening, he went home to the family with the tidings that he had
   earned more than a dollar and a half in a single day!
   As used in the text, what does the word “figuring” most nearly mean?
    (A) Believing
    (B) Calculating
    (C) Assuming
    (D) Doubting
7. The following is an excerpt from Jane Austen’s novel Mansfield Park
   (1814). The novel’s protagonist, Fanny Price, returns home after many
   years of living with her wealthy relatives at Mansfield Park.
   The instinct of nature was soon satisfied, and Mrs. Price’s attachment
   had no other source. Her heart and her time were already quite full;
   she had neither leisure nor affection to bestow on Fanny. Her
   daughters never had been much to her. She was fond of her sons,
   especially of William, but Betsey was the first of her girls whom she
   had ever much regarded. To her she was most injudiciously indulgent.
   William was her pride; Betsey her darling; and John, Richard, Sam,
   Tom, and Charles occupied all the rest of her maternal solicitude,
   alternately her worries and her comforts.
   As used in the text, what does the word “occupied” most nearly mean?
    (A) Stayed
    (B) Resided
    (C) Dwelled
      (D) Engaged
 8. While Mr. Davis, the art teacher, approved of creativity, he couldn’t
    __________ the students expressing themselves in the form of graffiti.
    Stylistically, he could appreciate the pieces, but he still considered
    them vandalism.
     Which choice completes the text with the most logical and precise
     word or phrase?
      (A) sanction
      (B) consent with
      (C) confirm that
      (D) boycott
 9. The canoe was going too quickly toward the rapids. Yusef was
    __________ the shore to slow them down. While they hit the bank
    hard, it slowed the boat down enough that Yusef and his friend were
    able to jump out and pull the canoe off the water.
     Which choice completes the text with the most logical and precise
     word or phrase?
      (A) hitting off
      (B) counting on
      (C) swimming on
      (D) depositing
10. It is probable that humans have been cooking since not long after our
     ancestors harnessed the power of fire some several hundred thousand
     years ago. Since that time, the sophistication of our technology has
     increased exponentially, and the technology of cooking is no
     exception. Insofar as it pertains to heat, the nature of culinary
     innovation has fallen primarily into one of two categories common to
     many technology __________: speed and precision.
     Which choice completes the text with the most logical and precise
     word or phrase?
      (A) beliefs
      (B) arcs
      (C) hypotheses
      (D) motives
11. Much like Old Faithful at Yellowstone National Park—by far the most
     well-known of the American geysers—Halley’s Comet is neither the
     most visually __________ nor the largest of its kind, but rather its
     renown derives from the dependable frequency with which it can be
     observed. Halley’s Comet falls into a category called Great Comets,
     which are those comets that become bright enough during their
     passage near Earth to be observed by the naked eye.
     Which choice completes the text with the most logical and precise
     word or phrase?
      (A) brilliant
      (B) conceited
      (C) intellectual
      (D) august
12. There is one linchpin name, however, too frequently omitted from
     surveys of the early impressionist art movement. Eugène Boudin—a
     friend and contemporary of the Paris impressionists—never described
     himself as an innovator or revolutionary, and yet his work
     tremendously influenced the transmigration of impressionism from the
     walls of radical art galleries to those of homes and businesses
     throughout Europe.
     As used in the text, what does the word “linchpin” most nearly mean?
      (A) Artistic
      (B) Essential
      (C) Commercial
      (D) Improvisational
13. Depending on the severity and type of infection, a doctor may select a
     narrow or broad-spectrum bactericidal drug. Narrow-spectrum drugs
     are better for the patient as they only kill the microorganism causing
     the infection via a specific mechanism of action. This differs from
     broad-spectrum drugs as they kill the microorganism and any other
     cell with the same type of mechanism of action. This often causes
     __________ and unpleasant side effects for the patient, such as
     superinfections and a wipeout of the body’s natural flora barrier.
     Which choice completes the text with the most logical and precise
     word or phrase?
      (A) severe
      (B) thoughtful
      (C) genuine
      (D) quiet
14. Not only does studying abroad help students to find their career path,
     but it also makes them more __________ to employers. Among the
     marketable benefits are language skills, an extensive network, cultural
     adaptability, self-reliance, open-mindedness, and an appreciation for
     diversity.
     Which choice completes the text with the most logical and precise
     word or phrase?
      (A) disparaging
      (B) appealing
      (C) introverted
      (D) monetarist
15. The staggering plurality of postmodern theater itself we must attribute,
     at least in part, to the initial fracturing of the modern drama in its
     __________ state, when refusing to yield to prevailing winds,
     Strindberg and Ibsen produced a cyclone.
     Which choice completes the text with the most logical and precise
     word?
      (A) outset
      (B) germinating
      (C) floral
      (D) germinal
16. Echolocation is the highly sophisticated sense of hearing in which
     sound waves bounce off objects and emit echoes that microbats use to
     detect obstacles. It is this __________ that allows the nocturnal
     microbat to sense where an object is, how big or small that object may
     be, and even how fast that object is moving.
     Which choice completes the text with the most logical and precise
     word?
      (A) object
      (B) material
      (C) phenomenon
      (D) thing
17. After degree completion, teachers need to acquire a teaching certificate,
     or a license to teach—most often, this licensing is achieved via teacher
     education programs where __________ teachers student-teach under
     more experienced instructors.
     Which choice completes the text with the most logical and precise
     word?
      (A) perspective
      (B) prospective
      (C) prospecting
      (D) previewing
18. The great dramatists of the 20th century—Arthur Miller, Tennessee
     Williams, John Osborne, and Harold Pinter—still owe an enormous
     creative debt to their 19th-century __________, most particularly to
     the two Scandinavian playwrights Henrik Ibsen and August
     Strindberg.
     Which choice completes the text with the most logical and precise
     word or phrase?
      (A) forebears
      (B) elders
      (C) seniors
      (D) historians
19. His is a household name, and he is most often thought of as a man
     unearthing the world’s most __________ mysteries while napping
     under an apple tree. He is Sir Isaac Newton, an English physicist and
     mathematician responsible for the law of universal gravitation.
     Which choice completes the text with the most logical and precise
     word?
      (A) imminent
      (B) eminent
      (C) complimentary
      (D) complementary
20. Social media has also been connected to better company retention.
     Some technologically savvy employers have created company pages
     where staff can make announcements, share ideas, discuss problems,
     and congratulate one another on excellent work. The page becomes a
     __________ where colleagues can support one another, but also where
     the company itself can show appreciation.
     Which choice completes the text with the most logical and precise
     word?
      (A) space
      (B) dimension
      (C) clearing
      (D) separation

Answer Explanations
 1. (D) The text discusses the idea that people may be reluctant to
    consider donating organs to strangers with whom they don’t have a
    connection. The most logical choice would therefore be “impersonal”
    since people may not see a personal connection to those who would
    benefit from the organ donation. Choices (A) and (B) are the opposite
    of what is needed, and (C) would include a large variety of ideas
    instead of the single one expressed.
2. (C) The text indicates that there is a possibility that the bee population
   could drastically drop, resulting in a need to convey a strong negative
   possibility, making “grave” the best option. Choices (A) and (B) are
   not sufficiently negative, while (D) is negative in a different way
   —“harshly authoritative”—which does not work in this context.
3. (D) The text states that teens are spending a significant portion of their
   time on social media, making it most logical to say that they have had
   “exposure to” online social communication. It is not (A) since they are
   not admitting anything. It is not (B) since “dearth” means a “lack” of
   something, which is the opposite of what is needed here. It is not (C)
   because the teens are clearly not ignorant of online social
   communication.
4. (B) The words are a bit more challenging on this question.
   “Deleterious” means “harmful,” “innocuous” means “harmless,”
   “subversive” means “rebellious,” and “organic” means “related to
   life.” Since the text states that this bacteria can be carried by humans
   without affecting their health, it can best be described as “harmless,”
   making “innocuous” correct.
5. (A) The text goes on to emphasize the negative effects of a lack of
   sleep, such as the resulting difficulty with focus in school. Thus, the
   overall effect of poor sleep would be harmful, making “detrimental”
   the most logical insertion. “Benevolent” means “kind,” “dishonest”
   means “lacking honesty,” and “dissenting” means “disagreeing.”
6. (B) When handling these vocabulary questions, insert each option into
   the sentence to determine which best fits the context. “All day long he
   was figuring to himself” means that he was counting the money he
   was making; he was “calculating” his earnings, as in choice (B). Insert
   “believing,” “assuming,” and “doubting” into the sentence; none of
   these choices provides a logical statement.
7. (D) “Engaged” accurately refers to Mrs. Price’s absorption with her
   sons. It is appropriate to say they “engaged,” or preoccupied, her
     attention. None of the other words fit; the sons neither “stay,”
     “reside,” nor “dwell” her worry or care.
 8. (A) The teacher in the text wants his students to be creative but does
    not want to allow graffiti that he would consider to be vandalism. He
    therefore does not want to “permit” or “sanction” that activity.
    Choices (B) and (C) would show that he agrees with the student
    behavior, which is the opposite of what is needed. It is not (D) because
    to “boycott” would be to avoid participating in an action oneself—
    instead of being an actor himself, he is prohibiting others from taking
    action.

 9. (B) Yusef is hoping that the shore would slow the canoe down so they
    can safely get out of the water—thus, “counting on” makes the most
    sense. The other options do not express this idea.

10. (B) The word “arc” in this context takes on a more unusual definition
     —“development.” The text discusses some of the technological
     developments that have taken place with respect to cooking. The other
     options all have to do with mental states than with developments,
     making them incorrect.

11. (A) “Brilliant” in this context can mean “visually bright” or “radiant,”
     making this an appropriate word to describe the look of a comet. The
     other options would not be appropriate to describe the physical
     characteristics of a comet.

12. (B) “Essential” is most fitting, since the text goes on to discuss
     Boudin’s tremendous influence on the artistic scene, making a history
     of impressionism severely lacking without mentioning him. The other
     words do give descriptions that can be associated with impressionism,
     but they do not fit this context.

13. (A) In context, the use of severe “and unpleasant side effects” forms
     the most logical sentence—unpleasant side effects could be described
     as “intense” or “severe.” Nonhuman side effects cannot be described
     as “thoughtful,” “genuine,” or “quiet.”
14. (B) The text highlights how studying abroad can make students more
     marketable to potential employers; in other words, the students would
     be more “appealing.” “Disparaging” means “insulting,” “introverted”
     means “shy,” and “monetarist” is associated with economic theory.

15. (D) “Germinal” indicates that it is in its earliest stage of development.
     “Outset,” in choice (A), has the correct general meaning but is the
     wrong part of speech since it is a noun instead of an adjective.
     “Germinating” and “floral” refer to plant life.
16. (C) This word refers to “echolocation,” which is best described as a
     “phenomenon” since it is a process that allows bats to navigate. The
     other options are all associated with physical items.
17. (B) “Prospective” means “preparing to do so in the future,” which
     applies to teachers who are being trained since they are not yet
     licensed professionals. “Perspective” in choice (A) indicates a point of
     view. “Prospecting” in (C) indicates searching. “Previewing” in (D)
     does not apply to people in the process of learning their profession,
     although it could refer to what the trainees themselves will be doing
     with respect to professional skills.
18. (A) The sentence first mentions 20th-century dramatists and then states
     that they owe a great deal to those who preceded them in the 19th
     century, making “forebears” the most sensible option. “Elders” in (B)
     and “seniors” in (C) refer to older groups of people but without the
     connotation of paving the way for current generations. “Historians” in
     (D) refers to those who study history, not to those who are studied by
     historians.
19. (B) This question tests you on the meaning of some commonly
     confused words. “Eminent” means “noteworthy,” which makes sense
     in reference to a famous concept like that of gravity. “Imminent,”
     choice (A), means “about to happen.” “Complimentary,” choice (C), is
     associated with praise. “Complementary,” choice (D), is associated
     with combining things together so they improve the quality of each
     other.
20. (A) “Space” in this context takes on one of its less common definitions
     —“free area.” This word makes the most sense since social media is
     described as something that has helped employers retain staff by
     creating a sense of community. While the other options are possible
     definitions of “space,” they do not make sense in this context.


Structure and Purpose
 Sample Question Language:
     Which choice best states the main purpose of the text?
     Which choice best describes the function of the underlined sentence in the text as a whole?
     Which choice best describes the overall structure of the text?



How Can You Succeed on Structure and Purpose Questions?
      Understand the text in its entirety to fully grasp the purpose of
      different selections. It is difficult to perform well on structure and
      purpose questions without reading the text in its entirety. If you do
      not comprehend the overall point of the text, it will be challenging to
      determine the significance of particular parts.
      Distinguish between “purpose” and “summary.” Students often
      answer structure and purpose questions by summarizing the text
      instead of finding the purpose of the text. A summary tells you what
      the text is about, while purpose tells you why the text was written—
      these are two very different tasks.
      Carefully consider the context before and after the selection.
      When asked a question about the function of a sentence, carefully
      read the sentences before and after so that you have a better sense of
      what the function of the sentence would be. Look out for transitional
      words—words like “although,” “however,” “additionally,” and “in
      fact”—to better understand the connection to the surrounding
      material.
  If you are asked about the “main” purpose, be sure it is not
  overly specific. It is easy to be trapped by choices on “main purpose”
  questions that do provide you with something that is true about the
  text, but don’t capture the overall significance of the text. Make
  certain that you go for an answer that captures the “main purpose,”
  not one that merely focuses on a small portion of the text.

Example
 This excerpt from “The American Forests” was part of John Muir’s
 1897 campaign to save the American wilderness. He would later be
 called the godfather of the American environmental movement.

 Surely, then, it should not be wondered at that lovers of their country,
 bewailing its baldness, are now crying aloud, “Save what is left of the
 forests!” Clearing has surely now gone far enough; soon timber will
 be scarce, and not a grove will be left to rest in or pray in. The
 remnant protected will yield plenty of timber, a perennial harvest for
 every right use, without further diminution of its area, and will
 continue to cover the springs of the rivers that rise in the mountains
 and give irrigating waters to the dry valleys at their feet, prevent
 wasting floods and be a blessing to everybody forever.

 Which choice best describes the function of the underlined sentence in
 the text as a whole?

 (A) It advocates for the importance of nationalism, militarism, and
      expansionism.
 (B) It underscores the need to emphasize environmentalism,
      scholarship, and piety.
 (C) It makes appeals that focus on economics, leisure, and religion.
 (D) It encourages a prioritization of justice, individualism, and truth.

Answer Explanation
Let us start by reading the introductory information. This excerpt is from a
text that advocates environmentalism and saving the American wilderness.
It therefore comes as no surprise that the excerpt will align with these
themes. Next, read the text in its entirety and paraphrase its argument. It
starts by stating that people who love the country are now greatly saddened
by the destruction of the forests. The underlined sentence states that the
clearing of the forest needs to stop, since timber is not plentiful, and people
will no longer have places to relax and worship. The text goes on to argue
that the forest can be responsibly managed to provide ongoing supplies of
timber and water for irrigation. So, the purpose of the sentence is to support
the general argument that the forests need to be preserved by emphasizing
the potential negative consequences that will happen if the forests continue
to be destroyed. Now we can evaluate the different choices. It is not (A)
because the sentence focuses on peaceful themes, not militaristic ones. It is
not (B) because while there is a focus on environmentalism, there is not an
emphasis on the need for scholarship. It is not (D) because the sentence
does not discuss the theme of individualism—even a single flaw in an
answer will make it incorrect. This leaves us with choice (C), which does
work because it appeals to the reader by focusing on economics (the
scarcity of timber), leisure (no grove in which to rest), and religion (no
grove in which to pray).

Practice Questions
 1. When developing any new technology, we need to stop and give the
    proposal critical thought. What does this development contribute to
    society? How many people will benefit from this development? In
    what ways can this development be harmful? Maybe most
    importantly, why? Why should time and resources be dedicated to this
    project, when time and resources are limited, and potential projects are
    unlimited? But this responsibility shouldn’t fall entirely upon the
    developer. We, as consumers, need to take a more active role as well.
    How does this technology help me? Does this technology do any
    harm? Why do I need this technology? Only once we’ve considered
    the relative benefits and costs of one project versus another can we
    begin to consider whether it’s worth it.
   What choice best describes the overall structure of the text?
    (A) It presents both society-wide and individual consumer questions
         that should be asked about potential new technology
         development.
    (B) It provides a series of specific critiques about the increasing
         advancement of technology in the modern world.
    (C) It questions whether technological advances should be halted to
         return to the morals of a simpler era.
    (D) It suggests that instead of technology, alternative approaches to
         solving social problems of development and resource allocation
         should be embraced.
2. What does it mean to be a “cinephile” in the 2020s? In the mid-1990s,
   Susan Sontag famously argued that the globalization and hyper-
   industrialization of Hollywood had “killed” cinema as an art form in
   favor of its big, formulaic blockbusters. However, other critics argue
   that independent art cinema has simply moved outside of the
   Hollywood studio system, onto YouTube and other user-generated
   video platforms. Some critics even challenge the term “cinephilia” for
   its snobbish connotations and apolitical origins.
   What choice best describes the overall structure of the text?
    (A) It decries the decay of the modern film industry.
    (B) It criticizes the advent of user-generated videos in the place of
         major studio productions.
    (C) It provides different perspectives on the notion of cinephilia.
    (D) It suggests that other forms of entertainment will ultimately
         displace film.
3. The following is an excerpt from the fairy tale “The Mouse, the Bird,
   and the Sausage” by the Brothers Grimm, published in 1812.
   Once upon a time, a mouse, a bird, and a sausage entered into a
   partnership and set up house together. For a long time all went well;
   they lived in great comfort, and prospered so far as to be able to add
   considerably to their stores. The bird’s duty was to fly daily into the
   wood and bring in fuel; the mouse fetched the water, and the sausage
   saw to the cooking.
   Which choice best describes the function of the underlined sentence in
   the text as a whole?
    (A) It describes the methods whereby each creature carried out its
         chores
    (B) It conveys the primary moral of the fable
    (C) It analyzes the individual differences in each creature’s
         motivations
    (D) It outlines the daily obligations of the three creatures
4. For the past fifty years it has been the conventional credence of
   ecologists and biologists alike that invasive, non-native plant species
   are, without exception, detrimental to the host ecosystem. However,
   recent studies at Penn State University indicate that the eradication of
   invasive plants—specifically fruit-bearing shrubs—can do more harm
   than good for the native animal populations.
   Which choice best states the function of the underlined sentence in the
   text as a whole?
    (A) It establishes the narrator’s scholarly authority in this field of
         study.
    (B) It states the principal argument of the author.
    (C) It summarizes a common understanding that is subsequently
         refuted.
    (D) It contrasts the work of ecologists with those of biologists.
5. While significant structural and functional differences exist between
   the various classes, a surfactant, simply put, describes any compound
   capable of reducing the surface tension between a liquid and one other
   substance. Surface tension, one will recall, refers to the tendency of
   liquid molecules to coalesce with one another, thus minimizing their
   collective surface area. This phenomenon is the physical principle
   underlying a familiar adage, “oil and water do not mix.” Phrased more
   precisely, oils, which contain primarily nonpolar hydrocarbon bonds,
   are immiscible with aqueous solutions, meaning they will not
   spontaneously dissolve in water, which consists of highly polar
   hydrogen-oxygen bonds. Instead, oils will tend to form a film over
   polar solvents, while surface tension serves to stabilize this film at the
   oil-water interface.
   Which choice best describes the function of the underlined phrase in
   the text as a whole?
    (A) It explains the process in which two immiscible substances are
         emulsified.
    (B) It implies that most laypeople cannot understand the topic of this
         article.
    (C) It shows that substances that do not have triglycerides cannot
         undergo saponification.
    (D) It connects the esoteric analysis to a commonly understood
         phenomenon.
6. The following is the preface to The White Slaves of England, a book
   published in 1854 to decry the horrible working and living conditions
   among the poor working classes of England.
   Let her miners, her operatives, the tenants of her workhouses, her
   naval service, and the millions upon millions in the Emerald Isle and
   in farther India attest its fallacy. These are the legitimate results of the
   laws and institutions of Great Britain; and they reach and affect, in a
   greater or less degree, all her dependencies. Her church and state, and
   her laws of entail and primogeniture, are the principal sources of the
   evils under which her people groan; and until these are changed there
   is no just ground of hope for an improvement in their condition. The
   tendency of things is, indeed, to make matters still worse. The poor
   are every year becoming poorer, and more dependent upon those who
   feast upon their sufferings, while the wealth and power of the realm
   are annually concentrating in fewer hands and becoming more and
   more instruments of oppression. The picture is already sufficiently
   revolting.
   Which choice best states the main purpose of the italicized terms in
   the text?
    (A) It names those who approve of oppression.
    (B) It underscores the widespread presence of injustice.
    (C) It legitimizes the British policy toward social class.
    (D) It shows the diversity of various empowered groups.
7. Excerpt from The Last Man, a novel by Mary Shelley, published in
   1826.
   My fortunes have been, from the beginning, an exemplification of the
   power that mutability may possess over the varied tenor of man’s life.
   With regard to myself, this came almost by inheritance. My father was
   one of those men on whom nature had bestowed to prodigality the
   envied gifts of wit and imagination, and then left his bark of life to be
   impelled by these winds, without adding reason as the rudder, or
   judgment as the pilot for the voyage. His extraction was obscure; but
   circumstances brought him early into public notice, and his small
   paternal property was soon dissipated in the splendid scene of fashion
   and luxury in which he was an actor.
   Which choice best describes the function of the underlined sentence in
   the text as a whole?
    (A) It shows that the narrator shares many of his father’s personality
         characteristics.
    (B) It demonstrates that the narrator received considerable financial
         resources to ensure a comfortable life.
    (C) It shows that the narrator has the same self-reliant and self-
         disciplined mindset as his ancestors.
    (D) It demonstrates how the narrator is rather fortunate in how the
         nature of chance seems to favor him.
8. Thalassemia describes a group of disorders in which either the α or β
   chain is quantitatively reduced. Depending on the mutation, these
   defects can present with a wide range of anemia-related symptoms,
   and are particularly prevalent throughout Africa, Southeast Asia, and
   the Mediterranean. This geographical distribution is anything but
   random. Many studies have demonstrated that the production of
   suboptimal hemoglobin confers a degree of protection against malaria,
   a potentially deadly infectious disease caused by members of the
   Plasmodium genus, which parasitize red blood cells. It follows, then,
   that whereas in many regions throughout the world thalassemia may
   merely constitute disease, in those where malaria is endemic, it
   represents a favorable evolutionary advantage.
   Which choice best states the main purpose of the text?
    (A) It links hemoglobin development to migration patterns.
    (B) It compares cultural characteristics to evolutionary traits.
    (C) It considers geographic particularities to evolutionary
         adaptation.
    (D) It connects environmental forces to medical innovations.
9. So why is it, with a rejuvenated effort to find evidence of
   extraterrestrial intelligence, the Search for Extraterrestrial Intelligence
   (SETI) has not found convincing evidence for alien life? Despite
   billions of dollars and years of research, SETI has nothing substantial
   to show for itself. In fact, the closest thing to ETI contact is the Wow!
   Signal: a strong narrowband radio signal detected in 1977 by Jerry R.
   Ehman of Ohio State University’s Big Ear radio telescope project.
   Ehman was able to successfully observe the signal for a 72-second
   window, circling its non-natural waves and writing “Wow!” next to it
   —his enthusiasm led to its name, but not to any significant
   breakthrough. Since 1977, efforts to relocate the signal have failed
   again and again.
   Which choice best states the main purpose of the text?
    (A) It shows that there is decisive evidence in favor of alien life.
    (B) It argues that the search for extraterrestrial intelligence has been
         virtually fruitless.
    (C) It presents how scientists are redoubling their efforts to build on
         Ehman’s discovery.
      (D) It observes how astronomers are notable for the enthusiasm with
          which they conduct their observations.
10. David Benson was a timid boy born to parents who had long since
     stopped worrying about having children. Willie and Louise had three
     grown girls, the youngest was nineteen and leaving to cosmetology
     school the year David was born. Louise had suspected an arsenal of
     health issues before realizing she was with child, and even then, she
     waited another three weeks to tell her unsuspecting husband.
     Which choice best describes the function of the underlined sentence in
     the text as a whole?
      (A) It demonstrates the age difference between David and his
           siblings.
      (B) It scientifically explains how David was genetically predisposed
           towards having a more introverted personality.
      (C) It gives a reason for why David went to live with a different
           family.
      (D) It gives insight into David’s personality and his parents’ state of
           mind.

Answer Explanations
 1. (A) Consider the overall way that the text is organized. It gives a series
    of questions that could be used to evaluate the pros and cons of new
    technological developments—this aligns with choice (A). It is not (B)
    because it does not critique technology in general but focuses on how
    one can evaluate a specific new technology. It is not (C) because the
    author does not advocate an end to the entirety of technological
    advancement. It is not (D) because the text does not focus on
    suggesting different approaches to solving social problems.

 2. (C) Do not focus on the specific argument but on the overall
    organization of the text. The text starts by asking what it means to be a
    cinephile, i.e., someone who loves movies. The text proceeds to share
    different opinions about what it means to be a film-lover. Thus, choice
    (C) makes the most sense. It is not (A) because while the first
    perspective presented seems to take this position, the second
    perspective does not. It is not (B) because there is not a critique of
    user-generated videos. It is not (D) because it does not suggest that
    film will be displaced but does present the possibility that it could be
    changed in its presentation.

3. (D) In this sentence, the chores for the creatures are described, helping
   the reader better understand the story that follows. It is not (A)
   because the chores are simply named, and no discussion of the
   methods of carrying out the chores is given. It is not (B) because this
   gives us no preview of a moral of the story. It is not (C) because while
   differences in the chores are given, there is no discussion of the
   motivations of the creatures.

4. (C) The author immediately contradicts this statement in the following
   sentence. The general purpose of this sentence is to give a general
   summary of what many people think about this issue, and then to use
   the rest of the text to state that most people are incorrect on this topic.
   It is not (A) since this text only indirectly establishes the author’s
   authority. It is not (B) because the primary position of the author
   comes in the sentence that follows. It is not (D) because ecologists and
   biologists agree according to this sentence.
5. (D) The phrase is provided as a relevant and recognizable example in a
   sea of very technical analysis. “Esoteric” means likely to be
   understood by only a specialized audience. Choices (A) and (C)
   involve concepts not referred to in this sentence. Choice (B) is
   incorrect because the example is used to extend understanding to
   laypeople rather than imply they cannot understand it.

6. (B) In this text, the narrator introduces the abuses found in 19th-
   century English society. The italicized selections can be reasonably
   inferred to be groups that could bear witness to the abuses. Since there
   are so many different groups that could highlight these abuses, it
   underscores the widespread presence of injustice in English society at
   the time. It is not (A) or (C) because the narrator is not suggesting
     these groups would approve or legitimize these practices. It is not (D)
     because while these groups were diverse, they were not empowered at
     the time.

 7. (A) In this text, the narrator is not talking about an inheritance of
    money or items. Rather, he goes on in the text to describe his father as
    a means of informing the reader of the personality or situation he
    inherited. This makes choice (A) the best option. Choice (B) is
    incorrect as there is no evidence of a monetary inheritance. Choice (C)
    is incorrect as the father is not described as self-reliant or self-
    disciplined, so the author would not have inherited these traits. Choice
    (D) is incorrect as we are not led to believe that this inheritance makes
    the speaker fortunate.

 8. (C) The text considers the geographical specificity of thalassemia
    disorders and explains that it is not coincidental but linked to
    evolution’s defense against malaria, making (C) accurate. The
    distribution is not linked to migration as in (A) or related to cultural
    phenomena as in (B). Finally, (D) is incorrect because there is no
    connection made to medical innovation in the text.
 9. (B) The text provides evidence for the claim that “SETI has nothing
    substantial to show for itself.” These text shows how a 72-second
    anomaly in 1977 that was never relocated is the closest thing we have
    of evidence of outside life. Hence, (B) is correct. Choice (A) implies
    that this evidence proved alien existence, which is false. We have no
    evidence for (C); we only know that efforts have failed in the past.
    Choice (D) is incorrect because it assumes that the significance of this
    example is Ehman’s “Wow!” rather than its feeble status as the closest
    we’ve come to proof.
10. (D) The underlined sentence provides an exposition that explains why
     David and his parents are the way they are, so (D) is the best choice.
     His siblings are not introduced until the following sentence, making
     (A) incorrect. (B) states that he is timid, but the lines do not offer a
     scientific explanation of the genetic reasons behind this. Moving in
     with a different family could refer to an outcome of David’s
    personality and his parents’ state of mind, rather than a cause, making
    (C) incorrect.


Cross-Text Connections
 Sample Question Language
   Based on the texts, how would Goodenough and Strawn (Text 2) most likely respond to
   Tartaro’s findings (Text 1)?
   Based on the texts, how would the sociologists and their colleagues (Text 1) most likely
   describe the approach of the researchers in Text 2?



How Can You Succeed on Cross-Text Connections Questions?
    Be clear on the main argument of each text. Text 1 and Text 2
    combinations are typically argumentative—each text will have a clear
    thesis that is presented and supported with examples. If you can put
    the main argument of each text in your own words, you will likely do
    well on these questions.
    Do not confuse an author’s viewpoint with the author’s
    consideration of possible objections. In argumentative essays,
    authors frequently present and analyze views with which they do not
    agree. After all, one of the best ways to convince someone of a
    position is to show why the opposite position is flawed. When you
    read the comparative texts, pay close attention if the author shifts to
    considering objections. Be mindful that not everything in a text may
    necessarily represent what its author believes.
    Realize that the relationships between texts will often be more
    nuanced. Instead of having clear pro and con arguments on a topic,
    the texts may have some similarities and very subtle differences. The
    texts could present somewhat different accounts of the same
    historical event; one text could provide an explanation for the events
    or phenomena described in the other text; one text could summarize a
    topic in a more general way, while the other text investigates the
      topic in a more specific way. Keep an open mind to determine the
      precise nature of the relationship between the texts.

   Example
     Text 1

     Through a combination of luck and perhaps cruelty, Beaumont’s work
     has since led several scholarships, awards, and buildings to be named
     in his honor. Despite his unethical research methods, Beaumont’s
     findings about the digestive tract have paved the way for further
     research in this field and have even led him to be called the Father of
     Gastric Physiology.

     Text 2

     Beaumont realized he could use St. Martin’s unique wound to learn
     more about the mechanisms behind digestion—he just needed St.
     Martin to participate. Beaumont decided to ask St. Martin to sign a
     document, and St. Martin, being unable to read, had no idea he was
     signing away his rights. As he signed that document, St. Martin
     became a legally bound test-subject. In the over 200 subsequent
     experiments on St. Martin, Beaumont was able to gain an
     understanding of the human digestive system.
     Based on the texts, the opinion of the author of Text 1 about the
     treatment of St. Martin in Text 2 would most likely be
     (A) ambivalent.
     (B) apathetic.
     (C) flattering.
     (D) antagonistic.

   Answer Explanation
You might find it most helpful to read the question first so that you have an
idea of what you might focus on while you read the text. Paraphrasing the
question, we need to understand the overall mindset of the author of Text 1
and understand how St. Martin is treated in Text 2. Text 1 acknowledges the
merit of Beaumont’s digestive research, but also mentions his possible
“cruelty” and the “unethical” nature of his research methods. In Text 2 we
learn that St. Martin unknowingly signed away his rights and became a
digestive test subject. Without having St. Martin as a research subject,
Beaumont would have been unlikely to learn as much as he did about the
mechanisms of human digestion. Beaumont was only able to secure St.
Martin as a research subject through unethical conduct. Given the positives
and negatives of this situation, the author of Text 1 would most likely feel
conflicted about St. Martin’s treatment. Choice (A), “ambivalent,” means
feeling conflicted making (A) the correct answer. “Apathetic” would
indicate no opinion at all, “flattering” is too positive, and “antagonistic” is
too negative.

Practice Questions
 1. Text 1 is an adaptation from the newspaper The Record-Union on
    January 30, 1893. It records the events that occurred in Hawaii that led
    to the annexation of the island chain for the United States, including
    the resignation of Hawaii’s last monarch, Queen Liliuokalani. Text 2
    is an excerpt from the obituary of Queen Liliuokalani upon her death
    as recorded in The Union Times on November 15, 1917.
     Text 1
     The commissioners are here on their way to Washington, and simply
     state that their instructions are to get the consent of our government to
     annex the islands . . . [Upon her abdication, Queen Liliuokalani
     stated:] “I, Liliuokalani, by grace of God and under the Constitution of
     the Hawaiian Kingdom, Queen, do hereby solemnly protest against
     any and all acts done against myself and the constitutional government
     of the Hawaiian Kingdom by certain persons claiming to have
     established a provisional government of and for this Kingdom.”
     Text 2
   The queen’s bold attempt to deprive the white residents of any voice
   in the affairs of government led to prompt retaliatory measures. The
   businessmen of the community named a “committee of safety,” which
   proceeded immediately with the formation of a provisional
   government and the reorganization of the volunteer military
   companies which had been disbanded in 1890 . . .
   How do the two texts use quotation marks differently?
    (A) Text 1 uses them to label a term, while Text 2 uses them to quote
        a historical figure.
    (B) Text 1 uses them to quote a historical figure, while Text 2 uses
        them to label a term.
    (C) Both texts use them to designate quotations from historical
        figures.
    (D) Both texts use them to label terms.
2. Text 1
   The great abundance of microplastics in marine and other
   environments is very detrimental to the ecosystem. In Japan, plastic-
   eating bacteria were discovered in a landfill. Since then, much
   research has been devoted to optimizing these bacteria so that they can
   eat plastic more quickly. It seems clear that plastic-eating bacteria are
   the most likely solution to our plastic crisis because the amount of
   plastic in the environment has built up to a point where it is already
   damaging the ecosystem.
   Text 2
   Right now, almost all of the plastics in the ocean are in macroscopic
   objects, but if they are broken down by plastic-eating bacteria, an
   explosion in the amount of microplastics in the ocean seems
   inevitable. This massive accumulation in microplastics could have an
   extremely detrimental effect on the ocean’s ecosystem. Thus, plastic-
   eating bacteria must be carefully researched before these creatures are
   released into the ocean.
   The relationship between the two texts is best summarized as
    (A) Text 1 presents an approach to solving a problem, while Text 2
        is skeptical of this approach.
    (B) Text 1 considers and addresses each of the objections from Text
        2.
    (C) Text 1 and Text 2 largely agree on both the nature of a problem
        and its best solution.
    (D) Text 1 dismisses a potential environmental issue, while Text 2
        proposes a method to deal with the environmental issue.
3. Text 1
   Not long before it was eradicated by vaccination, smallpox virus
   erased entire cultures on two continents, where fatality rates rose as
   high as 90%. For those who survived, it was a cause of permanent,
   often debilitating disfigurement. Prior to the HiB and DTaP vaccines,
   epiglottitis caused by Haemophilus influenzae, and diphtheria caused
   by Corynebacterium diptheriae were both exceedingly common
   causes of death in young children, largely because of their tendency to
   develop rapidly and obstruct the airway.
   Text 2
   Philosophically, medicine is premised on a balance between
   beneficence, and nonmaleficence. That is to say, for a medical
   intervention to be deemed ethical and appropriate, the risks of not
   treating an individual must always outweigh the risks inherent in the
   treatment itself. Risk accompanies every medical intervention, and
   vaccination is no exception.
   Someone with the philosophy outlined in Text 2 would most likely
   have what response to the information presented in Text 1?
    (A) While smallpox is clearly a case in which vaccination would be
        recommended, it is not clear that any intervention in the case of
        diphtheria would be needed.
    (B) Children are an exception to the rule when it comes to whether
        medical interventions are needed in anticipation of savings
        someone’s life.
    (C) It would be ethically unwarranted to use experimental
         interventions to preemptively treat relatively mild illnesses.
    (D) The use of the HiB and DTaP vaccines was clearly a case in
         which the risks of not treating individuals outweighed the risks
         of treating them.
4. The following is an excerpt adapted from Booker T. Washington’s
   notable “Atlanta Exposition Speech” in 1895. The second is part of a
   1903 response, titled “Of Mr. Booker T. Washington and Others,” by
   W. E. B. Du Bois.
   Text 1
   Our greatest danger is, that in the great leap from slavery to freedom
   we may overlook the fact that the masses of us are to live by the
   productions of our hands, and fail to keep in mind that we shall
   prosper in proportion as we learn to dignify and glorify common labor
   and put brains and skill into the common occupations of life . . . It is at
   the bottom of life we must begin and not the top. Nor should we
   permit our grievances to overshadow our opportunities.
   Text 2
   Mr. Washington represents . . . the old attitude of adjustment and
   submission, but adjustment at such a peculiar time as to make his
   program unique . . . Mr. Washington’s program naturally takes an
   economic cast, becoming a gospel of work and money to such an
   extent as apparently almost completely to overshadow the higher aims
   of life.
   Based on the texts, what Washington would most likely define as
   African American “compromise,” Du Bois would most likely define
   as
    (A) treason.
    (B) negotiation.
    (C) obedience.
    (D) persistence.
 5. Text 1
     Many historians find that general trends tend to repeat themselves if
     you look far enough back through the records of humanity. It truly can
     be said that there is nothing new under the sun. Perhaps this is simply
     a function of how long humans have been around, but perhaps it also
     says something about just how similar all humans are, even across
     thousands of years.
     Text 2
     Studying fashion history is a lot like listening to remixes of your
     favorite songs. As you examine textiles from around the world and
     through time, you’ll see constantly that most “new” fashions are just
     old ideas remade. And so, the women’s high-waisted shirts from the
     early 2000s weren’t anything new or different: they were simply 18th-
     century empire-style gowns remixed for a new generation.
     How would the historians of Text 1 most likely describe the high-
     waisted shirts from the early 2000s?
     (A) They are an example of a trend that recurs.
     (B) They demonstrate the modern revolution in fashion.
     (C) History will look upon them as being in poor taste.
     (D) They are altogether different from gowns in the 18th-century
         empire style.

Answer Explanations
 1. (B) Text 1 uses the quotation marks to quote Liliuokalani, while Text 2
    uses them to label the term “committee of safety.” Choice (A) is
    incorrect because it has the relationship backwards. And choices (C)
    and (D) are incorrect because the texts differ in how they use
    quotation marks.
 2. (A) Text 1 presents plastic-eating bacteria as an approach to solving
    the problem of plastic pollution in the ocean, while Text 2 expresses
    skepticism of plastic-eating bacteria as a solution, arguing that using
    plastic-eating bacteria will be ineffective and lead to additional
    problems. It is not choice (B) because Text 1 does not consider and
    address each objection mentioned in Text 2. It is not (C) because
    while they both agree that plastic pollution is a problem, they disagree
    on a solution. It is not (D) because Text 1 underscores the
    environmental problem of plastic pollution and doesn’t dismiss it;
    additionally, Text 2 does not present an approach to dealing with
    plastic pollution.

3. (D) The overall philosophy outlined in Text 2 is that medical
   practitioners must do a cost-benefit analysis to determine whether the
   possible benefits of a medical intervention outweigh the possible costs
   of the intervention. If the risks of not acting outweigh the risks of
   acting, the medical intervention should proceed. So, someone with this
   outlook would look at the vaccines described in Text 1 in a positive
   light, since people without vaccination for these diseases would be
   more susceptible to death. Therefore, choice (D) makes the most
   sense. It is not (B) because Text 2 does not make an exception for
   certain age groups. It is not (C) because this is not relevant to the main
   claim in Text 2. It is not (A) because both smallpox and diphtheria
   carry a risk of mortality as outlined by the text, making it likely that
   someone with the philosophy in Text 2 would recommend
   intervention.

4. (C) Text 1 expresses the idea that freed slaves should be patient in
   their quest to advance in society, taking advantage of the opportunities
   presented to them as they begin to advance up the economic ladder.
   Text 2, however, argues that the attitude in Text 2 is one of
   “submission” that overshadows the “higher aims of life” beyond
   making money. So, Du Bois, the author of Text 2, would most likely
   define the “compromise” in Text 1 as “obedience.” While Du Bois has
   a negative attitude towards Washington’s position, it is not so negative
   as to describe it as treasonous, as in (A). The relatively positive ideas
   in (B) and (D) would not align with the position in Text 2.

5. (A) Text 1 expresses the position that “there is nothing new under the
   sun” since historical patterns repeat. The historians with this position
    would look at the recurrence of an older fashion trend as an example
    of the tendency for historical events to recur. It is not (B) because the
    high-waisted shirts are not revolutionary but represent a recurrence of
    a trend. It is not (C) because the historians do not take a particular
    position as to fashion taste. It is not (D) because the gowns are like
    ones from the 18th-century empire style.


Central Ideas and Details
 Sample Question Language:
   Which choice best states the main idea of the text?
   According to the text, why would a boat built for a freshwater lake be ill-fitted for a
   saltwater environment?
   According to the text, what is true about Jonathan?



How Can You Succeed on Central Ideas and Details Questions?
    Carefully read and thoroughly paraphrase the text before
    examining the answer choices. While this is good advice on most
    all SAT Reading questions, it is particularly important on central
    ideas questions. The meaning will likely be based on the text as a
    whole rather than one small part of it, so understand the entirety of
    what is given. If the text is a more challenging genre, like poetry, you
    may want to re-read the text until it makes sense.
    Be careful not to latch on to answers just because they mention
    specific parts from the text. If you don’t fully grasp the general
    meaning of the text, it will be easy to become trapped by answers that
    are partially right in citing specific language in the selection.
    Be flexible as you evaluate choices. There are nearly infinite ways
    that answers to big picture questions can be phrased, so do not
    eliminate choices too quickly—keep an open mind.

  Example
     The massacre at My Lai increased domestic opposition to U.S.
     involvement in the Vietnam War and helped mobilize an anti-war
     march of half a million people in December 1969 in Washington.
     Following the march, widespread campus protests resulted in the
     killing of four students by National Guardsmen in Ohio. By the early
     1970s, American involvement in the war was winding down.
     Deployed soldiers were reported to be disillusioned, angry, frustrated,
     and using drugs as a coping mechanism. Domestically, the brutality of
     My Lai and the government’s continued attempts to conceal it
     exacerbated anti-war sentiment. Direct U.S. military involvement in
     the Vietnam War ended in 1973.
     Which choice best states the main idea of the text?
     (A) The My Lai massacre was a tragic example of the death of
         college students fighting for their political beliefs.
     (B) After their defeat in My Lai, National Guardsmen returned to the
         United States to quell a rebellion by half a million people.
     (C) Anti-war sentiment led to the tragic outcome of the massacre of
         My Lai.
     (D) Reaction to the My Lai massacre contributed to the eventual
         withdrawal of the United States from the Vietnam War.

   Answer Explanation
Thoroughly read the text and put its overall meaning in your own words. Be
sure to avoid simply restating specific language and instead paraphrase the
big picture. Overall, the text connects the My Lai massacre to anti-war
sentiment, anti-war protests, and discouragement of deployed U.S. soldiers;
the text ends by stating that U.S. involvement in Vietnam ended after these
events. So, the My Lai massacre helped lead to feelings among the U.S.
people that led to the U.S. withdrawal from Vietnam. The question asks us
to state the main idea of the test, so when we evaluate the choices, we must
be certain that our chosen answer gives us the big idea of the text, not just
specific information. It is not (A) because there is no evidence in the text
that the My Lai massacre had college students as the victims; moreover, this
choice does not connect to the main idea of how the massacre affected U.S.
attitudes towards the war. It is not (B) because while some of this specific
language—“half a million” and “National Guardsmen”—is mentioned,
there is no evidence that the guardsmen returned to the United States to
quell a rebellion by 500,000 people. It is not (C) because the text focuses on
the effects of the My Lai massacre, not its causes. Choice (D) is correct
because the text connects the feelings that resulted from the My Lai
massacre to the eventual withdrawal of the United States from the Vietnam
War.

Practice Questions
 1. The text is adapted from the 1949 Geneva Conventions.
        Any breach of the law is bound to be committed by one or more
        individuals and it is normally they who must answer for their acts.
        Nevertheless, if the author of the act contrary to international law
        is an agent of the State, which is indubitably the capacity of
        members of the armed forces who take others prisoner or are
        responsible for guarding them, it is not his responsibility alone
        which is involved, but also that of the State, which must make
        good the damage and punish the offender. To the extent, however,
        that individual men and women acquire “international” rights and
        obligations as they do in connection with the laws and customs of
        war, so are they invested with the capacity of committing
        international offences, for which they personally may be held
        responsible, as well as the State to which they belong.
     According to the text, under the Geneva Conventions, who or what of
     the following could be held responsible for violation of the rules of
     war?
      (A) Only individuals
      (B) Only States
      (C) Both individuals and States
      (D) Only individuals in violation of the orders of their government
 2. The following is an excerpt from Jane Austen’s novel Mansfield Park
    (1814). The novel’s protagonist, Fanny Price, returns home after many
   years of living with her wealthy relatives at Mansfield Park.
       Of her two sisters, Mrs. Price very much more resembled Lady
       Bertram than Mrs. Norris. She was a manager by necessity, without
       any of Mrs. Norris’s inclination for it, or any of her activity. Her
       disposition was naturally easy and indolent, like Lady Bertram’s;
       and a situation of similar affluence and do-nothingness would have
       been much more suited to her capacity than the exertions and self-
       denials of the one which her imprudent marriage had placed her in.
       She might have made just as good a woman of consequence as
       Lady Bertram, but Mrs. Norris would have been a more
       respectable mother of nine children on a small income.
   According to the text, Mrs. Norris is
    (A) more capable than Mrs. Price.
    (B) similar in personality to Mrs. Price.
    (C) more lethargic than Mrs. Price.
    (D) less respectable than Mrs. Price.
3. The trillion-dollar question is, when the ink dries, will the European
   Union be listed in the chapters of current events? Or will it be
   relegated to the annals of academia, its skeleton but a diplomatic case
   study of oil and water, its ashes little more than a Kennedy School
   lecture on the perils of collaboration between square pegs and round
   holes?
   What is the main concern of the text?
    (A) Will the countries of the European Union end their conflicts
        peacefully or by resorting to an expensive arms race?
    (B) Will the European Union become obsolete and only read about
        in textbooks as a lesson in things that are dysfunctional?
    (C) Will the Kennedy School give frequent lectures about the
        European Union and its success?
    (D) Will the European Union extend loans to their members to
        ensure future success and prosperity for all countries?
4. The following text is adapted from F. Scott Fitzgerald’s 1920 novel
   This Side of Paradise. The novel opens with the following character
   introduction of Fitzgerald’s semi-autobiographical protagonist, Amory
   Blaine.
      When Amory was five, he was already a delightful companion for
      her. He was an auburn-haired boy, with great, handsome eyes
      which he would grow up to in time, a facile imaginative mind, and
      a taste for fancy dress. From his fourth to his tenth year, he did the
      country with his mother in her father’s private car, from Coronado,
      where his mother became so bored that she had a nervous
      breakdown in a fashionable hotel, down to Mexico City, where she
      took a mild, almost epidemic consumption. . .
      So, while more or less fortunate little rich boys were defying
      governesses on the beach at Newport or being spanked or tutored
      or read to from “Do and Dare,” or “Frank on the Mississippi,”
      Amory was biting acquiescent bell-boys in the Waldorf,
      outgrowing a natural repugnance to chamber music and
      symphonies, and deriving a highly specialized education from his
      mother.
   According to the text, Amory’s upbringing and education can best be
   described as
    (A) demanding.
    (B) scholarly.
    (C) exhausting.
    (D) unique.
5. “I’m Nobody! Who Are You” is a poem by Emily Dickinson,
    published in 1890.
   I’m Nobody! Who are you?
   Are you – Nobody – too?
   Then there’s a pair of us!
   Don’t tell! they’d advertise – you know!
   How dreary – to be – Somebody!
   How public – like a Frog –
   To tell one’s name – the livelong June –
   To an admiring Bog!
   Which choice best states the main idea of the text?
    (A) The public at large will recognize artists for their
         accomplishments.
    (B) Charitable giving is preferable to selfish accumulation of wealth.
    (C) It is better to be anonymous than to be famous.
    (D) Modern commercialism has impacted natural beauty.
6. The following is an adaptation from The Three Stages of Clarinda
   Thorbald by William T. Hamilton, Jr. In it, young Clarinda is waiting
   for the day of her wedding to arrive.
       Clarinda sat in an old chair and read a thesis upon love, and she
       found set forth in this thesis that without love the world would not
       go around. Further, without love life would be but dross and
       hideous calamity. She also found therein that men have died from
       love, and women have languished in torments when it was
       unrequited.
   According to the text, the message in the thesis that Clarinda reads can
   best be summarized as:
    (A) Love is not important to life since it leads to trivial distractions.
    (B) Love is essential to life; without it, life would be dreadfully dull.
    (C) Love takes hard work from both parties to be successful.
    (D) Love cannot be fully understood without a literary education.
7. The following is an excerpt from a letter by Mary Wollstonecraft. In it,
   she discusses a trip to Sweden and her observations of the Swedish
   servant class in the late 19th century.
   The population of Sweden has been estimated from two million and a
   half to three million; a small number for such an immense tract of
   country, of which only so much is cultivated—and that in the simplest
   manner—as is absolutely requisite to supply the necessaries of life;
   and near the seashore, whence herrings are easily procured, there
   scarcely appears a vestige of cultivation. The scattered huts that stand
   shivering on the naked rocks, braving the pitiless elements, are formed
   of logs of wood rudely hewn; and so little pains are taken with the
   craggy foundation that nothing like a pathway points out the door.
   According to the text, how does the author describe Sweden’s
   relationship to its natural resources?
    (A) Overly exploiting them
    (B) Lacking in them
    (C) Not taking full advantage of them
    (D) Allowing foreigners to interfere with them
8. This is an adaptation of a letter written in April of 1775, shortly before
   the American Revolution, by John Adams under the pen name
   Novanglus. In it, he discusses the relationship between Great Britain
   and her colonies.
       There is no provision in the common law, in English precedents, in
       the English government or constitution, made for the case of the
       colonies. It is not a conquered, but a discovered country. It came
       not to the king by descent, but was explored by the settlers. It came
       not by marriage to the king, but was purchased by the settlers . . . It
       was not granted by the king of his grace, but was dearly, very
       dearly earned by the planters, in the labour, blood, and treasure
       which they expended to subdue it to cultivation. It stands upon no
       grounds then of law or policy, but what are found in the law of
       nature, and their express contracts in their charters, and their
       implied contracts in the commissions to governors and terms of
       settlement.
   According to the text, Adams most likely considered which of the
   following as most responsible for creating the colonies?
     (A) The British monarch
     (B) Foreign dominions
     (C) Settlers
     (D) The English government
 9. The following text is adapted from William Shakespeare’s 1609 poem
    “Sonnet 12,” in which he addresses another person.
        When I do count the clock that tells the time,
        And see the brave day sunk in hideous night;
        When I behold the violet past prime,
        And sable curls, all silvered o’er with white;
        When lofty trees I see barren of leaves,
        Which erst from heat did canopy the herd,
        And summer’s green all girded up in sheaves,
        Borne on the bier with white and bristly beard,
        Then of thy beauty do I question make,
        That thou among the wastes of time must go
     What is the main idea of the text?
     (A) Love for the person the narrator addresses endures just as much
         as the beautiful things found in nature.
     (B) The beauty of the person the narrator addresses is just as fleeting
         as natural beauty.
     (C) To attain true serenity, it is most helpful to mediate in a setting
         surrounded by beautiful living things.
     (D) When time goes by too quickly, one can seemingly slow time’s
         passage through contemplation.
10. The following excerpt is from Mary Shelley’s 1826 novel The Last
     Man.
        I am the native of a sea-surrounded nook, a cloud-enshadowed
        land, which, when the surface of the globe, with its shoreless ocean
        and trackless continents, presents itself to my mind, appears only
        as an inconsiderable speck in the immense whole; and yet, when
        balanced in the scale of mental power, far outweighed countries of
        larger extent and more numerous population. So true it is, that
        man’s mind alone was the creator of all that was good or great to
        man, and that Nature herself was only his first minister. England,
        seated far north in the turbid sea, now visits my dreams in the
        semblance of a vast and well-manned ship, which mastered the
        winds and rode proudly over the waves.
     According to the text, England is a country that
     (A) is limited in its influence due to its unfavorable geography.
     (B) he has not personally visited, but dreams of with great
         frequency.
     (C) has exceeded what might be expected of it given its size and
         location.
     (D) has weather that made him determined to seek a more pleasant
         climate.

Answer Explanations
 1. (C) The text references the punitive liability of individuals if they
    were to commit war crimes and mentions that that same liability
    applies to states: “so are (individuals) invested with the capacity of
    committing international offences, for which they personally may be
    held responsible, as well as the State to which they belong.” Thus,
    choice (C) is the correct answer.
 2. (A) The text compares Mrs. Price to her sisters, indicating that Mrs.
    Price is more inclined to the idleness of Lady Bertram than the vigor
    of Mrs. Norris, so choice (A) is correct. Choice (B) falsely implies
    that Mrs. Price and Mrs. Norris are comparable, (C) suggests that Mrs.
    Price is the industrious one, and (D) wrongly indicates that Mrs.
    Price’s negative qualities make her more respectful.
3. (B) The text poses the question of whether the European Union will
   survive. An appropriate paraphrasing can be found in choice (B). The
   text does not indicate an arms race as in (A). The concern is not
   actually whether lectures will be given about the European Union, but
   instead if it will become something purely historical, making (C)
   incorrect. Finally, the text does not focus on the possibility of loans for
   European Union members, making (D) incorrect.
4. (D) The text indicates that Amory’s upbringing is unlike other “little
   rich boys” and that his education is “highly specialized,” making
   choice (D) correct. Choices (A) and (C) are not supported since the
   text describes Amory’s youth as one of advantage and leisure. While
   Amory was certainly educated, his knowledge came from atypical
   experiences rather than from the more conventional scholarly
   methods, making (B) incorrect.
5. (C) The poem starts by saying that one shouldn’t tell anyone else
   about who they are, and then goes on to discuss how dreary it would
   be to be well-known. Hence, the main idea of the text is that it is
   better to be anonymous than famous. It is not (A) because the poem
   emphasizes how good or bad it is to be known, not whether the public
   will recognize the accomplishments of artists. It is not (B) because the
   focus of the poem is on fame, not distribution of wealth. It is not (D)
   because while nature is mentioned in passing—the frog and the bog—
   these are metaphorical references to how well-known someone might
   be.
6. (B) The text indicates that the thesis that Clarinda reads states that
   “without love, the world would not go around,” and that “life would
   be but dross and hideous calamity.” In other words, without love, life
   would be dull and disastrous. Choice (A) would be the opposite of the
   intended meaning; (C) may be true but is not suggested in this text;
   choice (D) is incorrect because while understanding literature may be
   helpful to better understanding love, given that Clarinda is reading a
   thesis, it is not suggested that it cannot be fully understood without a
   literary education.
 7. (C) Wollstonecraft describes Sweden as cultivating only “so much” of
    the immense tract of its land, suggesting that Sweden is not taking full
    advantage of its natural resources. It is not choice (A), since she
    argues they are not using the resources as much as they could. It is not
    (B) because she mentions Sweden as having an immense tract of land.
    It is not (D) because she does not discuss foreign interference with the
    resources.
 8. (C) In the text, Adams clearly states that in his view, the colonies
    came to be acquired through the diligence of the settlers, not from
    some other source. He states the colonies were “very dearly earned by
    the planters, in the labour, blood, and treasure which they expended to
    subdue it to cultivation.” The other options would ascribe creation of
    the colonies to foreign sources, which the text does not support.
 9. (B) The narrator alludes to various things that deteriorate in
    appearance as time goes by—violets, trees, the sun, for example. The
    narrator ends the excerpt by saying “Then of thy beauty do I question
    make / That thou among the wastes of time must go.” In other words,
    the narrator is starting to question whether the person he is addressing
    will waste away like the objects observed from nature. This makes (B)
    correct, since “fleeting” means “temporary.” It is not (A) because the
    narrator is highlighting the temporary nature of things, not their
    permanence. It is not (C) because the narrator does not indicate that
    being surrounded by natural beauty will curtail his negative thoughts.
    It is not (D) because the narrator emphasizes the inevitable decay of
    things instead of the power to slow the apparent passage of time.
10. (C) In the first part of the text, the speaker discusses the “sea-
     surrounded nook” on which he lives. Later in the paragraph, this
     “nook” is revealed to be England. All of the text is a discussion of
     England. In discussing England, the speaker says that it “appears only
     as an inconsiderable spec in the immense whole; and yet, when
     balanced in the scale of mental power, far outweighed countries of
     larger extent and more numerous population.” In short, he is saying
     that while England is small, it is disproportionately powerful. This
     makes (C) the best choice. Choice (A) is incorrect because while the
    geography is unfavorable, its influence hasn’t been limited. Choice
    (B) is incorrect because the speaker lives in England. Choice (D) is
    incorrect as we have no evidence that the speaker wants to move to a
    better climate.


Quantitative Evidence
 Sample Question Language
   Which choice most effectively uses data from the table to complete the example?
   Which choice best describes data from the table that support the scientist’s claim?
   Which choice best describes data from the graph that weakens the researcher’s claim?



How Can You Succeed on Quantitative Evidence Questions?
    Take time to fully grasp the claim or conclusion in the text. Read
    the entirety of the text, but read the last sentence especially closely as
    that is where the claim or conclusion is likely to be stated. Carefully
    review the key, labels, and headings of the graph. The graphs will
    come in a variety of forms—circle graphs, tables, and linear charts.
    Be patient as you familiarize yourself with the organization of the
    graph before you dive into the quantitative evidence questions. You
    likely will not need to fully understand every bit of data presented in
    the graph to answer the question; focus on the big picture.
    Watch the scales on the axes. Sometimes the least value in a graph
    will be at zero; other times, the least value may be at a higher
    number. Also, sometimes the spacing between numbers on the x-axis
    may be different from that on the y-axis. Avoid careless mistakes on
    the quantitative evidence questions by paying close attention to
    where the numbers begin and the separation between data points.
    Limit yourself to the evidence provided. Even if you have
    background knowledge on the data presented in the graph, base your
    analysis solely on the information provided. The SAT will not expect
    you to have specific knowledge on the information in the graphs; the
      test will provide you with the information you need to draw
      reasonable conclusions.
      Use trends in the chart to make predictions. If a question asks you
      to make a prediction for a scenario not pictured in the graph, use the
      trends evident in the data presented to make a reasonable prediction.
      See if the numbers are increasing or decreasing, and if they seem to
      be doing so in a linear or exponential way. The SAT will not try to
      “trick” you by having you make extremely precise predictions—the
      answers will be far enough apart from one another that you can make
      a good estimate to be correct.

Quantitative Evidence Skill-Building Exercise
Before we dive into the actual Quantitative Evidence questions, let’s begin
with this exercise in graph interpretation. This drill will help you build the
skills necessary to succeed on the Quantitative Evidence questions.




                                    Figure 1
Scientists monitored the growth of French bean plants over a period of two
months. The average height of the French bean plants in potting soil versus
a hydroponics system was charted over time.
 1. According to Figure 1, what was the average height of the French bean
    plants that were planted in the potting soil 30 days after being planted?
      (A) 12 cm
      (B) 15 cm
      (C) 26 cm
      (D) 30 cm
 2. The information in Figure 1 most strongly suggests that
      (A) planting French bean plants in either hydroponics or in potting
          soil gives similar results.
      (B) planting French bean plants in either hydroponics or in potting
          soil negatively affects the plant growth.
      (C) planting French bean plants in hydroponics generally results in
          greater plant height than when French bean plants are planted in
          potting soil.
      (D) planting French bean plants in potting soil generally results in
          greater plant height than when French bean plants are planted in
          hydroponics.
 3. Based on Figure 1, at the completion of the observation period,
    approximately how great a difference was there between the average
    French bean plant height from the potting soil group and the average
    French bean plant height from the hydroponics group?
      (A) 12 cm
      (B) 17 cm
      (C) 28 cm
      (D) 45 cm
Source: www.bts.gov/content/annual-wasted-fuel-due-congestion

                                           Figure 2

  4. Based on Figure 2, between the years 1985 and 2010, the average
     annual fuel wasted due to traffic congestion in the very large cities in
     the table roughly
       (A) doubled.
       (B) tripled.
       (C) quadrupled.
       (D) quintupled.
  5. Another city is added to Figure 2 and has an average annual fuel
     wasted due to traffic congestion in the year 2000 of 12 million gallons
     of gasoline. Based on the overall pattern in the figure, what it is the
     most likely population category of this city?
       (A) Small
       (B) Medium
       (C) Large
       (D) Very Large
  6. An economist hypothesizes that during an economic downturn, some
     cities may see a decrease in their average annual fuel wasted due to
     traffic congestion. If that were the case, based on Figure 2, during
     which of the following years would the economist most likely
     conjecture that an economic downturn took place?
       (A) 1988
       (B) 1997
       (C) 2000
       (D) 2007




Sources: Census; HUD
    Data and table gathered from the St. Louis Federal Reserve: https://fred.stlouisfed.org
    Note: Gray areas indicate economic recessions.
                                 Figure 3

7. Which statement best generalizes the overall trend in Figure 3 in the
   real median household income in the United States over the time from
   1995 to 2010?
    (A) It increases exponentially.
    (B) It decreases exponentially.
    (C) It stays relatively constant.
    (D) There is insufficient information to make a determination.
8. Which of the following is an accurate statement about the trend in
   Figure 3 in the average sales prices for homes in the United States
   before and after economic recessions?
    (A) They consistently decrease.
    (B) They consistently increase.
    (C) They remain the same.
    (D) They sometimes increase and sometimes decrease.
9. The information in Figure 3 would lend the greatest direct support to
   which of the following points of view?
    (A) A home has become increasingly unaffordable for the typical
        household in the United States.
    (B) Families in the United States would find more affordable
        housing in other countries.
    (C) The very least expensive houses in the United States have
        steadily increased in value.
    (D) The monthly payment to purchase a home paid by a typical
        household in the United States has decreased over the past three
        decades.
Source: govinfo.gov

                                    Figure 4

10. According to Figure 4, which spending categories were the largest in
     2000 and in 2020 respectively?
       (A) “Other” in both
       (B) Pensions, Health Care
       (C) Defense, Welfare
       (D) Health Care, Defense
11. Which of the following facts, if added to Figure 4, would give the
     reader a more precise understanding of spending categories of the
     United States government in the year 2020?
       (A) The budgets for each of the individual states
       (B) The total spending of the U.S. government in 2010
       (C) The popularity of the different U.S. political parties in 2020
       (D) What comprises the “other spending” category
12. Based on Figure 4, a U.S. Federal budget analyst in 2000 as compared
     to one in 2020 would be more likely to be concerned about
     overspending on which of the following categories?
       (A) Education
       (B) Interest
       (C) Health Care
       (D) Welfare

Answer Explanations
 1. (B) Follow the darker line that represents the potting soil, and find
    what the y value is when the x value is at 30—it is 15 cm.
 2. (C) For all the days after the start of the study, the beans cultivated in
    the hydroponics system had an average height greater than the beans
    cultivated in the potting soil. Therefore, the graph most strongly
    suggests that planting French bean plants in hydroponics generally
    results in greater plant height than when French bean plants are
    planted in potting soil. It is not choice (A) because the results diverge,
    and it is not choice (B) because the plants do indeed grow, suggesting
    that there is not a negative impact from these environments.
3. (B) The graph provides 60 days of observations, so look at the final set
   of points on the far right side of the graph to compare. At 60 days, the
   hydroponics sample has an average height of 45, while the potting soil
   sample has an average height of 28. Subtract 28 from 45 to get 17 cm
   as the difference in height.
4. (A) The two very large cities in the table are Boston and Los Angeles.
   Their average annual fuel wasted due to traffic congestion roughly
   doubled between 1985 and 2010, with Boston’s going from 29.5 to
   67.3, and L.A.’s going from 119.9 to 238.4.

5. (C) In the year 2000, the large city of Orlando had 15.9, and the large
   city of Salt Lake City had 9.4. An unknown city with a level of 12
   would come closest to the levels of these large cities.
6. (D) Between the years 2005 and 2010, the level in Dayton decreased
   from 7.2 to 7.1, and the level in Los Angeles decreased from 242.1 to
   238.4. Since these are the only examples of a decrease in average
   annual fuel waste over a period of time, the economist would likely
   believe that during the interval of 2005–2010, an economic downturn
   took place. The only option that has a year within this interval is 2007.

7. (C) The real median household income is represented by the lower
   line, and in the interval between 1995 and 2010, it stays relatively
   constant.

8. (D) In the first and third economic recessions indicated in the graph, in
   the years 1991 and 2008, the average sale price of houses sold in the
   United States decreased. In the second economic recession in 2001,
   the average increased. Therefore, it would be accurate to say that the
   average sales prices for homes in the United States sometimes
   increase and sometimes decrease after recessions.
 9. (A) In 1990, the average home price was approximately 150,000,
    while the average household income was around 55,000—the home
    price was about three times that of household income. By 2019, the
    home price was approximately 380,000, while household income was
    around 70,000—the home price was then about five times that of
    household income. Given the increase in the ratio over time, it would
    be reasonable to state that based on this data, a home has become
    increasingly unaffordable for the typical U.S. household. It is not
    choice (B) because there is nothing in the graph to compare home
    prices in the United States to those in other countries. It is not choice
    (C) because only the average sales prices of homes are presented—
    there is no breakdown into least expensive vs. most expensive homes.
    And it is not choice (D) because the amount a household must pay per
    month to buy a house is not presented; it is possible that factors other
    than the home price, such as interest rates and taxes, would affect the
    average monthly payment.
10. (B) “Respectively” is a word that sometimes comes up in questions,
     meaning that the descriptions apply in the order the items are
     mentioned—in this situation it means that the first adjective will apply
     to the first item, and the second adjective will apply to the second
     term. In the year 2000, pensions were the largest category at 25% of
     government spending. In the year 2020, health care was the largest
     category at 23% of government spending.
11. (D) In the 2020 graph, 12% of the overall government spending is
     labelled as “other.” It would help the reader have a more precise
     understanding of spending categories in 2020 if a detailed breakdown
     of what comprised the “other” category were provided. It is not choice
     (A) because the graph provides information on the overall U.S.
     government spending, not on individual state spending. It is not choice
     (B) because while this would help a reader better understand the
     amount of money spent, it would not help clarify what the spending
     categories were. And it is not choice (C) because even with an
     understanding of the popularity of different political parties, there
     would not necessarily be clarity on the makeup of the government
     spending.
12. (B) In the year 2000, interest represented 12% of U.S. government
     spending, while in 2020, interest represented 5%. So, it would be
     reasonable to conclude that a federal budget analyst would be more
     concerned about overspending on interest in 2000 than in 2020. The
     other three categories all increased in their percentage of federal
     spending from 2000 to 2020, so it would be more likely that an analyst
     would be concerned about overspending in these categories in 2020,
     not in 2000.


Quantitative Evidence Question
Now that we have warmed up with the previous exercise, let us do an
example of what you will actually see on the SAT for this type of question.

  Example
Source: Adapted from Statista.com


       Through observations of foot traffic at local shopping malls over a
       five-year period between 2011 and 2016, a student concludes that
       most consumers are increasingly interested in shopping at in-person
       locations. The student argues that while consumers may be aware of
       the possibility of Internet shopping, they are not showing an increased
       interest in purchasing items using an Internet-based platform.
       Which choice best describes data from the figures that would weaken
       the student’s argument?
       (A) The worldwide number of digital consumers and the worldwide
           business to consumer sales have an inverse relationship.
      (B) Worldwide business to consumer sales and the number of digital
          consumers both consistently increased from 2011–2016.
      (C) While consumers increasingly spent their money on Internet-
          based platforms between the years 2011–2016, consumers
          significantly curtailed the amount of money they spent at
          physical store locations.
      (D) The amount of digital consumer spending leveled off in the years
          2015 and 2016, demonstrating an increasing reluctance to
          embrace a new medium for shopping.

   Answer Explanation
Start by reading the text and the question. On quantitative evidence
questions, the primary claim, conclusion, or hypothesis is typically stated in
the final sentence of the text. So, while you should read the entirety of the
text, be certain to read the final sentence of the text very carefully. The main
argument expressed in the text is that while consumers are aware of Internet
shopping, they are not actually purchasing items over the Internet. The
question asks us to find data from the figures that would hurt the student’s
argument—in other words, we need data that shows that consumers are
purchasing items over the Internet. Now, let’s examine the figures to find
evidence of this. Figure 1 shows that business to consumer sales
consistently increased over this time. Figure 2 shows that the number of
digital buyers increased over this period. Let’s evaluate the choices. It is not
(A) because there is a positive correlation between the sales and consumers,
not an inverse relationship. It is not (C) because there is no information in
the figures about how much money consumers spent at physical store
locations. It is not (D) because the amount of digital consumer spending
increased, not leveled off; also, this claim would support the author’s
argument rather than undermine it. The correct answer is choice (B)
because it cites evidence about the increase in Internet spending that hurts
the author’s argument.

Practice Questions
 1.
     Market researchers have found that consumer behavior is influenced
     by many factors. Some factors, like motivation and learning, are based
     on concrete mental actions over which consumers feel they have a
     choice. While consumers may want to feel they are in control of their
     purchasing decisions, psychological factors are only about 15% of
     what influences their commercial behavior. Personal and cultural
     factors, largely outside of a consumer’s psychological control,
     constitute a/an __________
     Which choice most effectively uses information from the graph to
     complete the statement?
     (A) mere 25% of what influences consumers.
     (B) significant 60% of the factors affecting consumers.
     (C) important component of what consumers learn.
     (D) much larger 85% of what impacts consumer behavior.
2.
Depending on the time of year, different substances play a greater role
in providing ground covering. In the winter months, ice and snow can
together constitute nearly half of what covers the ground in a given
area. In the summer, the ice and snow melt away, leaving virtually
nothing but sediment on the ground. So, while the ice and snow will
vary quite a bit from month to month, the amount of sediment on the
ground __________
Which choice most effectively uses data from the graph to complete
the example?
        (A) remains roughly the same depth throughout the year.
        (B) is thickest in February.
        (C) is thinnest in August.
        (D) increases in depth from August to December.
  3.




Scientists studied 164 families over a period of five years. During that time, the researchers recorded
the families’ perceptions of well-known stressors as positive or negative. The results of this study are
                                    summarized in th figure above.


       Some researchers argue that knowledge about the typical family
       perception of common stressors can be helpful to psychologists in
       anticipating what life events are most likely and least likely to cause
       patients stress. A college professor takes a different approach, arguing
       that some events are not consistently viewed as positive or negative by
       patients, making it more challenging for psychologists to predict how
       patients will perceive life events.
       Which choice gives an example from the table that the college
       professor would most likely cite to support her argument?
       (A) Birth of a new child
       (B) Marriage
       (C) Moving to a new home
       (D) Job loss
  4.

                         Year
   Antibiotic         Discovered            Year Resistant Bacteria Discovered
 Penicillin                1941         1942 Penicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus
                                        1967 Penicillin-resistant Streptococcus pneumoniae
                                        1976 Penicillinase-producing Neisseria gonorrhoeae
 Vancomycin                1958         1988 Plasmid-mediated vancomycin-resistant
                                        Enterococcus faecium
                           2002         Vancomycin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus
 Amphotericin B            1959         2016 Amphotericin B-resistant Candida auris
 Methicillin               1960         1960 Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus
 Azithromycin              1980         2011 Azithromycin-resistant Neisseria gonorrhoeae
 Caspofungin               2001         2004 Caspofungin-resistant Candida
 Daptomycin                2003         2004 Daptomycin-resistant methicillin-resistant
                                        Staphylococcus aureus
 Ceftazidime-              2015         2015 Ceftazidime-avibactam-resistant KPC-producing
 avibactam                              Klebsiella pneumoniae

Information in table sourced from https://www.cdc.gov/drugresistance/about.html


       It is critical that doctors not overprescribe antibiotics to patients.
       While it is difficult for a doctor to ignore the illness of the patient in
       their immediate care, they must consider that by prescribing
       antibiotics to those patients not in an acute situation, they might be
       contributing to the development of antibiotic-resistant bacteria. The
       increasing speed at which antibiotic-resistant bacteria develop after
       the discovery of a new antibiotic underscores the critical need for
       doctors to be prudent in their prescriptions.
     Which choice best describes data from the table that supports the
     writer’s argument?
     (A) After all—penicillin had antibiotic-resistant bacteria discovered
          not once, not twice, but three times over the years.
     (B) Impressively, biologists were able to craft an antibiotic that
          managed to avoid becoming antibiotic resistant for over five
          decades: Amphotericin B.
     (C) Some antibiotics are simply not as effective as others;
          methicillin, for example, had an antibiotic-resistant strain of
          bacteria discovered in the very same year the antibiotic was
          created by scientists.
     (D) While it took thirty years before an antibiotic-resistant bacteria
          for vancomycin to form, an antibiotic-resistant bacteria to the
          newer ceftazidime-avibactam developed in the same year the
          drug was introduced.
5.




     During the colonial era, when the Iroquois remained unified, they
     represented a major obstacle to the advancement of European settlers
     on the American continent. Once the Iroquois became disunited,
     however, they became a less formidable opponent to settlers,
     eventually leading to their conquest. The historical turning point from
     the period of Iroquois unity to disunity is typically seen as
     __________
     Which choice most effectively uses data from the timeline to complete
     the example?
     (A) Turtle Island
     (B) Mourning Wars
     (C) the American Revolution
     (D) the Dissolution of the League
6.




     Tortoiseshell cats have a coat that contains a mixture of orange and
     black fur, while calico cats have orange, white, and black patches.
     Cats with these two coat variations have a lot in common, including
     the reason why they have both orange and black fur. Nearly all
     tortoiseshell and calico cats are female. This is because the gene that
     dictates whether the cat’s fur is orange or black is located on the X
     chromosome. Since male cats have XY chromosomes, they will
     usually only have one allele coding for either orange fur or black fur.
     As indicated in a recent breeding study in which a calico cat was bred
     with an orange cat, with the results in the accompanying graph, it is
     most likely that these two groupings of cat coloration would have
     some male members: __________
     Which choice most effectively uses data from the chart to complete
     the example?
       (A) Calico and black
       (B) Tortoiseshell and calico
       (C) Orange and black
       (D) Orange and tortoiseshell
  7.




Adapted from pewresearch.org.


       To investigate the popularity of web usage by high school students, a
       sociologist utilized a study from the 2010s that asked teens not just if
       they used the Internet, but how frequently they used the Internet daily.
       The sociologist concluded that between the years of 2014 and 2018,
       while there was not a significant change in those teens who chose to
       use the Internet, the frequency of their Internet use increased
       significantly.
       Which choice best describes data from the graphs that support the
       sociologist’s conclusion?
       (A) The percentage of teens who reported using the Internet almost
           constantly increased from 26% to 45% between 2014 and 2018.
       (B) Teens who reported using the Internet less often slightly
           decreased between 2014 and 2018, going down a full
           percentage point.
     (C) The total percentage of teens who either use the Internet several
         times a day or almost constantly remained roughly the same
         between the years 2014 and 2018.
     (D) The total number of teenage Internet users increased
         significantly between the years 2014 and 2018.
8.




   Critical exposure periods for thalidomide-associated developmental defects during human
development. Source: Thalidomide: The Tragedy of Birth Defects and the Effective Treatment of
                          Disease, by James Kim. Published in 2011.


     Thalidomide was marketed toward pregnant women in the mid-1900s
     with promises to alleviate morning sickness. What the pharmaceutical
     company that marketed this drug and consumers did not know is that
     the reaction behind the making of this drug produced two products
       with remarkably similar structures. One structure was a sedative while
       the other was teratogenic, meaning it could disrupt the development of
       a fetus. The drug was banned from production after this fact was
       realized, but not before countless children around the world had been
       born with severe birth defects. In fact, if the drug had been
       administered at the following interval after conception, it could
       potentially cause multiple birth defects: __________
       Which choice most effectively uses data from the chart to complete
       the example?
       (A) days 21–23.
       (B) days 24–26.
       (C) days 27–31.
       (D) days 32–35.
  9.




(Source: NYC Department of Housing Preservation and Development
      Bedbug infestations present a major threat to the safety and comfort of
      people living in major urban areas. Once bedbug infestations take
      hold, they are very difficult to stop. While bedbugs are a significant
      concern, sometimes residents take advantage of the fear of bedbugs to
      make unwarranted complaints. One government official concludes
      that there is little to no connection between bedbug complaints and
      actual bedbug violations.
      Which choice best describes data from the chart that would weaken
      the government official’s conclusion?
      (A) While there were 12,768 bedbug complaints in 2010 in New
          York City, there were only 4,808 actual bedbug violations that
          year.
      (B) The number of bedbug violations never rose above 5,000 in any
          given year between 2004 and 2010 in New York City.
      (C) There is a direct correlation between bedbug complaints and
          bedbug violations in New York City between 2004 and 2010.
      (D) In 2012, there were no recorded bedbug violations,
          demonstrating that a governmental policy to encourage bedbug
          complaints is unwarranted.
10.
    Between the years 2008 and 2015, the NASA space program had
    changing priorities. At the beginning of the time period, manned space
    missions were a significant component of the program budget, while
    towards the end of the time period, exploration missions took on a
    greater role. One thing that was constant, however, was growth in the
    overall NASA budget. One component of the budget consistently
    mirrored the changes in the overall NASA budget over this time
    period: __________
    Which choice most effectively uses data from the chart to complete
    the statement?
     (A) exploration missions.
     (B) robotic technology.
     (C) space shuttles/stations.
     (D) aeronautics.

Answer Explanations
 1. (D) This is the only option that provides the accurate sum of the
    personal and cultural factors from the graph: 25% for personal, 60%
    for cultural, making a total of 85% for them both. Choices (A) and (B)
    do not provide the total sum, and (C) is too vague.

 2. (A) The sediment curve fluctuates between 12 and 14 inches in
    thickness all year long, making (A) the correct choice. Choice (D)
    may be appealing, but be careful; the overall ground covering
    increases, but the amount of sediment stays pretty steady.
 3. (C) The graph shows what percentage of people consider certain
    stressors to be positive or negative. The central bar on the graph is
    labeled “Moving to a New Home” and is split nearly in half. This tells
    us that about half of people find moving to be a positive stressor,
    while the other half find it to be a negative stressor. This would make
    it difficult to predict how any given person would feel about moving.
    The other stressors shown on the graph all have clear majorities,
    which would make it much easier to predict how a person would feel
    about that event. This example would then support the approach of the
    college professor, who argues that some events are not consistently
    viewed as positive or negative by patients, making (C) the best option
    and the other choices incorrect.
4. (D) The overall argument of the writer is that doctors need to be
   careful to not overprescribe antibiotics because antibiotic-resistant
   bacteria are developing increasingly quickly. Choice (D) uses data
   from the table to support this argument, since it points out that it took
   quite a while for antibiotic-resistant bacteria to form for an earlier
   antibiotic, but it is taking much less time for antibiotic-resistant
   bacteria to form for a newer antibiotic. Choice (A) is not relevant to
   the claim, (B) would contradict the author’s claim, and (C) does not
   focus on how the effectiveness of antibiotics has changed over time.
5. (C) The example shows that there is a historical turning point from a
   period of unity to disunity. According to the timeline, the event prior
   to the American Revolution is the formation of the league, indicating
   unity. The event after the American Revolution is dissent among the
   Iroquois, showing that the American Revolution would have been the
   turning point from unity to disunity. The other options do not show
   this change.
6. (C) According to the text, most tortoiseshell and calico cats are
   female. Therefore, choices (A), (B), and (D) are unlikely since they all
   mention the tortoiseshell and/or the calico cats as being male. Choice
   (C) is correct because this grouping has just orange and black
   coloration, making it more likely that some of its members could be
   male. Further, the text states that male cats have “one allele coding for
   either orange fur or black fur,” making (C) the most appealing option.

7. (A) The sociologist concludes that while teen participation in Internet
   use would remain relatively constant over this period, the amount of
   Internet usage by these teens would greatly increase. Choice (A)
   highlights the near doubling in the percentage of teens who used the
   Internet almost constantly, which would strongly support the
   sociologist’s conclusion. It is not (B) because this does not focus on
     frequency of Internet use. Choice (C) would not provide evidence to
     show an increase in Internet usage. Choice (D) would contradict the
     sociologist’s claim that the number of teens using the Internet
     remained fairly constant.
 8. (C) Looking at the figure, we can see that exposure to thalidomide in
    days 27–31 could lead to nine different birth defects (excluding only
    thumb aplasia). Exposure in this range, therefore, would interfere with
    the most developmental processes. Choice (A) is incorrect as exposure
    in this range could only lead to thumb aplasia. (B) is incorrect as
    exposure in this range would only lead to five different defects. (D) is
    incorrect as exposure in this range would only lead to six possible
    birth defects.
 9. (C) The conclusion of the government official is that there is little to
    no connection between bedbug complaints and actual bedbug
    violations. Since we are asked to determine what would weaken this
    conclusion, we must find something that shows the government
    official would be incorrect. Choice (C) does this effectively, since it
    states that the bedbug complaints and bedbug violations are directly
    correlated, showing a likely connection between the two statistics. The
    other options do not effectively demonstrate how there would indeed
    be a connection between complaints and violations, weakening the
    official’s argument.
10. (D) The sum of the four curves will give the entire budget, so the
     budget went from about 18 million to 21 million. We can rule out (B)
     and (C) since these components show a decrease. Finally, the graph
     indicates that exploration missions doubled from about 5 million (18–
     13) to 10 million (21–11), which is not representative of the more
     gradual increase in the program budget. Aeronautics, on the other
     hand, went from about 5 to 8 million, and maintained about a third of
     the entire budget consistently, so it is closely mirrored with the budget
     itself.


Textual Evidence
 Sample Question Language:
   Which finding, if true, would most directly undermine Smith’s hypothesis?
   Which finding, if true, would most directly support the economists’ hypothesis?
   Which quotation from the surveys best illustrates the researcher’s claim?



How Can You Succeed on Textual Evidence Questions?
    Paraphrase the author’s claim or hypothesis. Having a clear idea
    of the author’s position will ensure that you can identify further
    information that would support or undermine that argument. Imagine
    that you had to explain the author’s thesis to a third party—if you can
    create a good summary of their position, you understand what you
    have read.
    Give yourself time to make sense of the question. Other SAT
    Reading questions, like ones that ask you to determine the best word
    given the context, are easily understood in a few seconds. On Textual
    Evidence questions, you may need to consider what sort of evidence
    could support an argument or undermine (hurt) an argument. These
    questions may take more time to fully grasp—do not rush through
    them.
    Realize that the answer will not be “in” the passage. Since Textual
    Evidence questions typically ask you to think about new information
    or different positions, do not try to “find” the answer in the wording
    of the text. Instead, focus on applying the big ideas of the text to
    different situations.

  Example
    Haitian Creole is a complex mixture of Western European, West
    African, Native American, and other languages. Europeans invaded
    Haiti in the 1500s, bringing enslaved Africans to Haiti to work
    alongside the native Arawak people. An anthropologist claims that
    Haitian Creole originated in the late 1600s and early 1700s when the
    number of native French workers, African slaves, and freed Africans
     were roughly the same, and linguistic interactions among the different
     groups were frequent.
     Which finding, if true, would best support the anthropologist’s claim?
     (A) Historical documents demonstrating that European influence on
         the native populations in Haiti culminated in the 1800s rather
         than the 1700s.
     (B) A survey of Haitian correspondence from the early 1600s shows
         no use of Creole, while a survey of Haitian correspondence from
         the late 1700s shows extensive use of Creole.
     (C) Linguistic analysis that finds the similarities of Haitian Creole to
         the Creole languages of Louisiana and other areas in the
         Americas.
     (D) Economic data that shows the increased productivity of freed
         slaves as compared to both enslaved native Arawak and enslaved
         West Africans.

   Answer Explanation
Carefully read the text and pay especially close attention to its final
sentence, since that is typically where the claim will be stated. The text
introduces Haitian Creole and briefly summarizes its history. The specific
claim to evaluate is that Haitian Creole originated in the late 1600s and
early 1700s because of the frequent interactions among different ethnic
groups at the time. Think about what sort of evidence would support this
claim—it would need to demonstrate that there was a fairly clear beginning
to Haitian Creole during this time period. Now, let’s consider the choices. It
is not (A) because this would not align with the time period when the
anthropologist claims the language was initiated. It is not (C) because this
statement is not directly relevant to the claim. It is not (D) because this
focuses on economics instead of linguistic history. Choice (B) is correct
because a survey that showed this shift in correspondence, from not using to
Haitian Creole to using it over this time period, would provide clear
evidence supporting the anthropologist’s claim.

Practice Questions
1. The “red tide” in coastal Florida is a harmful algal bloom from
   microscopic algae that makes fish caught in affected areas unsafe to
   consume. Researchers claim that pollution from the fertilizer used on
   Floridian farms is the most significant cause of the red tide.
   Which finding, if true, would best support the researchers’ claim?
    (A) The red tide intensity is positively correlated with the amount of
         fertilizer in the water.
    (B) In the state of Texas, researchers found less red tide than there is
         in Florida.
    (C) Some fish are more susceptible to fertilizer pollutants than
         others.
    (D) People who suffer from color blindness are less likely to
         perceive the effects of the red tide.
2. “The Convergence of the Twain” is an early 1900s poem by Thomas
    Hardy. The poem addresses the tragic loss of the ship Titanic in the
    year 1912. An English professor claims that in the poem, the speaker
    alludes to the luxury and opulence of the ship before its demise:
    __________.
   Which quotation from “The Convergence of the Twain” most
   effectively illustrates the claim?
    (A) “Steel chambers, late the pyres/Of her salamandrine fires”
    (B) “Jewels in joy designed/To ravish the sensuous mind”
    (C) “For her—so gaily great—/A Shape of Ice, for the time far and
        dissociate.”
    (D) “Said “Now!” And each one hears,/And consummation comes,
        and jars two hemispheres.”
3. A sociologist studies the influence of colors in business marketing. She
   notes that fast-food restaurants significantly rely on red and yellow
   coloration in their signs and logos. She claims that red and yellow
   colors subconsciously influence consumers to desire the food at the
   fast-food restaurants since they create positive feelings. This idea is
   known as the “ketchup-and-mustard” marketing theory, with red
   ketchup and yellow mustard associated with these colors.
   Which of the following, if true, would best support the sociologist’s
   claim?
    (A) A phone survey of adults who self-selected as fast-food diners
        found that most diners preferred ketchup and mustard as
        condiments when ordering a sandwich.
    (B) A study of fast-food restaurant signs found that 45% of fast-food
        signs were in some combination of yellow and red, while 55%
        of fast-food signs were in a combination of other colors.
    (C) Fast-food restaurants that have red and yellow signage
        consistently had lower revenue per customer than restaurants
        that have signage featuring other colors.
    (D) A randomized survey of adults found that a statistically
        significant majority found red and yellow signs more likely to
        prompt their appetite than signs in other common colors.
4. “When I Consider How I Spend My Light” is a mid-1600s poem by
    John Milton. In the poem, Milton expresses his frustration with losing
    his sight, preventing him from carrying out his work. However, as a
    Puritan, he resolves that despite his unfortunate fate, he will still obey
    God: __________.
   Which quotation from “When I Consider How I Spend My Light”
   most effectively illustrates the claim?
    (A) When I consider how my light is spent/Ere half my days, in this
        dark world and wide,
    (B) And that one Talent which is death to hide/Lodged with me
        useless, though my Soul more bent
    (C) To serve therewith my Maker, and present/My true account, lest
        he returning chide;
    (D) God doth not need/Either man’s work or his own gifts; who
        best/Bear his mild yoke, they serve him best.
5. Ghosts is an 1881 play by Henrik Ibsen. A drama critic claims that
   Ibsen uses the play to critique the societal emphasis on the
   accumulation of wealth instead of on ethical conduct: __________.
   Which quotation from Ghosts most effectively illustrates the claim?
    (A) “Oh, let me help you. That’s it. Why, how wet it is! I will hang it
        up in the hall. Give me your umbrella, too; I will leave it open,
        so that it will dry.”
    (B) “And the immorality of such a marriage! Simply for the sake of
        the money—! What sum was it that the girl had?”
    (C) “That was all very kindly done. The only thing I cannot justify
        was your bringing yourself to accept the money.”
    (D) “So then Joanna and I decided that the money should go towards
        the child’s bringing-up, and that’s what became of it; and I can
        give a faithful account of every single penny of it.”
6. Christopher Ries is an American glass artist from central Ohio who has
   produced some of the largest crystal sculptures ever made. In a paper
   for an art history class, a student claims that Ries made significant
   advances in art because he was able to utilize the capacities of
   industry in his process of artistic creation.
   Which of the following, if true, would best support the student’s
   claim?
    (A) Ries had his artwork recognized by the Columbus Museum of
        Art for excellence by an artist native to the state of Ohio.
    (B) A particular sculpture by Ries causes the viewer to feel that they
        are looking at the emissions from a smokestack.
    (C) Ries became an artist-in-residence at a Pennsylvania factory
        where he had access to the finest glass sculpting material.
    (D) Art historians note the similarities in the biography of Ries to
        the biography of Francis Hayman, a British artist during the
        Industrial Revolution.
7. The Importance of Being Earnest is an 1885 play by Oscar Wilde. The
   play takes place in Victorian London, and surprised audiences of the
   time by avoiding discussion of the serious political and moral issues
   of the day. Instead, as a critic claims, the play turns social expectations
   upside down by emphasizing the need to treat trivial issues seriously:
   __________.
   Which quotation from The Importance of Being Earnest most
   effectively illustrates the claim?
    (A) “I am sick to death of cleverness. Everybody is clever
        nowadays. You can’t go anywhere without meeting clever
        people. The thing has become an absolute public nuisance. I
        wish to goodness we had a few fools left.”
    (B) “Oh, before the end of the week I shall have got rid of him. I’ll
        say he died in Paris of apoplexy. Lots of people die of apoplexy,
        quite suddenly, don’t they?”
    (C) “Your German grammar is on the table. Pray open it at page
        fifteen. We will repeat yesterday’s lesson.”
    (D) “Your guardian enjoys the best of health, and his gravity of
        demeanour is especially to be commended in one so
        comparatively young as he is. I know no one who has a higher
        sense of duty and responsibility.”
8. Loyalty to a widespread approach kept Hill and Becquerel from further
   innovations in color photographic technology.
   Which quotation from a passage about this topic most effectively
   illustrates the claim?
    (A) We tend to think of color photography as a profoundly modern
        innovation, belonging to an era no earlier than the 1950s.
    (B) A new approach was required before color photography could
        emerge as a truly viable artistic and documentary medium.
    (C) Pioneers of color photography such as American minister Levi
        Hill and renowned French physicist A.E. Becquerel were
        hampered in their efforts by a fidelity to the then-popular
        daguerreotype method.
    (D) Color variants of this method—such as Hill’s toilsome
        “heliochromy”—often took several days to develop and yielded
           only dim images with colors that faded rapidly when exposed to
           direct light.
 9. As the immediate successor of textualis, the Schwabacher style strove
    for increased readability with significant reductions to capital
    embellishment, and a smoother, more curvaceous form invocative of
    handwriting. Though Schwabacher is sometimes associated with the
    Italian humanist writings of the early 16th century, it saw substantial
    use throughout all of Europe in the century thereafter and was only
    partially deposed by Fraktur in the late 1700s. Schwabacher continued
    to appear in printed texts as a secondary typeface into the 20th
    century.
     Which finding, if true, would most strongly support the author’s claim
     about the popularity of Schwabacher style in the 1600s?
     (A) A survey of European documents in the 1600s showing the
         popularity of textualis
     (B) A consistency in the use of Schwabacher throughout European
         manuscripts in the 1600s
     (C) An emphasis on Schwabacher fonts in the religious texts in Asia
         and the Americas
     (D) Twentieth-century government documents that use Schwabacher
         style in official publications
10. The following is an adaptation of an excerpt from Vice President Al
     Gore’s speech on August 17, 1997, which was the 125th anniversary
     of the founding of Yellowstone National Park and the National Park
     System.
     Despite the hundreds of millions of people who come here every year,
     not every American has been to Yellowstone, and not every American
     has seen its grandeur and its glory. But every American has a stake in
     this land because it is part of our heritage. It belongs to us all, and we
     have an obligation to ensure that it is here for us all, for the next 125
     years.
     Which of the following statements would most undermine the
     argument made in the text?
     (A) Tourists indicate that they are primarily interested in enjoying
         the parklands with their younger relatives.
     (B) Some members of the Shoshone tribe considered the lands of
         Yellowstone their exclusive territory.
     (C) Legal action has prevented mining companies from excavating
         gold and other precious minerals from Yellowstone.
     (D) While some Americans have been able to visit Yellowstone, not
         every American has been able to see it.

Answer Explanations
 1. (A) This is the only option that draws a direct connection between the
    pollution from the fertilizer on the farms to the red tide. Choice (B) is
    irrelevant because it brings up information about a different state.
    Choice (C) does not focus on the red tide in general. Choice (D) deals
    with the perception of rather than the actuality of the red tide.

 2. (B) We need an option that focuses on luxury and opulence—choice
    (B) effectively does this by referring to jewels and sensuous thoughts.
    The other options do not refer to luxury and opulence.
 3. (D) The sociologist claims that red and yellow colors subconsciously
    influence consumers to desire the food at the fast-food restaurants
    since they create positive feelings. Choice (D) would best support this
    claim since it is a well-crafted survey with results that would
    demonstrate evidence for the claim. It is not (A) because it doesn’t
    focus on the coloration of signage. It is not (B) because this does not
    connect to subconscious consumer preferences. It is not (C) because it
    would show the opposite of what the sociologist claims, given the
    lower sales at restaurants with red and yellow signs.
 4. (D) The claim is that the narrator will still obey God despite his
    unfortunate fate. Choice (D) states that those who bear God’s mild
    yoke, or burden, will serve him best, giving the most effective
    illustration of this claim. Choices (A) and (B) do not focus on
    obedience, and choice (C) emphasizes the need for honesty instead of
    emphasizing obedience.
5. (B) The claim is that the Ibsen uses the play to critique the societal
   emphasis on the accumulation of wealth instead of on ethical conduct.
   Choice (B) shows how Ibsen would make such a critique, since this
   selection expresses surprise and outrage at the immorality of a
   marriage done solely for the sake of money. It is not choice (A)
   because the person is acting in a helpful manner by assisting someone
   with their umbrella. Choice (C) also emphasizes kind conduct. Choice
   (D) highlights the meticulous recordkeeping of the narrator.

6. (C) The claim is that Ries made significant advances in art because he
   was able to utilize the capacities of industry in his process of artistic
   creation. Choice (C) effectively accomplishes this goal, since Ries was
   able to use the finest glass sculpting material available at an industrial
   factory to make his art. The other options do not connect using
   industrial capacities to help with artistic creation.
7. (A) The critic claims that the play turns social expectations upside
   down by emphasizing the need to treat trivial issues seriously. Choice
   (A) demonstrates the need to treat trivial issues seriously by
   expressing weariness with cleverness and a wish that there were “a
   few fools left.” It is not (B) because this addresses the serious issue of
   mortality. It is not (C) because the narrator has a serious tone that is
   focused on getting the lesson completed. It is not (D) because this
   emphasizes the more serious themes of duty and responsibility.

8. (C) The text states that loyalty to a common approach kept Hill and
   Becquerel from making further innovations. Choice (C) effectively
   illustrates this by stating that the two were “hampered in their efforts
   by fidelity” (loyalty) to a popular method. Choice (A) does not
   address the problems that the two encountered. Choice (B) is vague
   and does not connect to the two researchers. Choice (D) provides
   specific information but does not connect to the claim.
 9. (B) The author claims that Schwabacher was substantially used
    throughout all of Europe in the 1600s, since this would be the century
    after the 16th century (the 16th century is the 1500s). So, choice (B)
    would strongly support this claim since it would demonstrate the
    widespread use and popularity of this form of writing. It is not (A)
    because this underscores the popularity of a different type of writing.
    It is not (C) because the author does not discuss the popularity of this
    style in Asia and the Americas. It is not (D) because this refers to the
    incorrect time period.
10. (B) The text states that these lands belong “to us all,” indicating that
     the narrator believes that all Americans have some claim to this land.
     If there were members of the Shoshone who considered the lands of
     Yellowstone their exclusive territory, that would hurt the claim that the
     lands rightly belong to all Americans, thus undermining Gore’s
     argument. It is not choice (A) because tourists wanting to visit
     national parks would support Gore’s argument to preserve these lands
     for all. It is not (C) because it would support the idea that
     governmental intervention is necessary to preserve the lands from
     economic exploitation. And it is not (D) because Gore acknowledges
     that not every American has visited Yellowstone but responds by
     arguing that Yellowstone remains a part of our country’s heritage.


Inferences
 Sample Question Language:
     Which choice most logically completes the text?



How Can You Succeed on Inference Questions?
Inference questions will ask you to determine what the author suggests or
implies based on different selections of a passage. How can you do well on
these questions?
  Have a general feel of your answer before evaluating the choices.
  There are plenty of ways you could state what could logically
  complete a short text. When creating your own answer on these types
  of questions, it is better to be broad and flexible than it is to be
  specific and rigid. Doing so will ensure that you are open-minded as
  you review the possible options.
  Watch the transitions before the underlined portion. There will
  often be a transitional word immediately before the underlined
  portion—be sure you pay attention to it since it will have an impact
  on how you answer.
  Do not be overly literal. Look for what the author may be saying
  indirectly—what is being suggested or implied? Especially watch out
  for overly literal interpretations when you read genres like fiction,
  poetry, and drama.
  There will be a definite answer. It is easy to dismiss an inference
  question as being just based on someone’s opinion, making it a
  matter of luck to pick the correct option. This will not be the case on
  the SAT Reading—inference questions (along with all other test
  questions) will have a definite answer with a clear justification. If
  you are having difficulty formulating an answer on inference
  questions, give the test the benefit of the doubt instead of
  immediately assuming there must be a test question error.
  Do not eliminate answers too quickly. Since you are determining
  the best possibility for completing a text, you will be better served by
  keeping answer choices open as possibilities instead of crossing them
  off too quickly. Sometimes when you look at an answer choice a
  second time, you will more fully grasp its meaning and it will make
  more sense as a possibility.

Example
 Microplastics are microscopic particles of plastic that tend to
 accumulate toxins and are in some cases toxic themselves.
 Unfortunately, microplastics tend to end up being eaten by various
 organisms. The primary reason for this problem is that in recent years,
     approximately 380 million tons of plastic are produced annually.
     Plastic is not biodegradable, which means that once it enters the
     environment it can take several hundred years to degrade. Some have
     proposed plastic-eating microorganisms as a revolutionary solution to
     this critical issue. Others are skeptical of the claims made about
     __________
     Which choice most logically completes the text?
     (A) whether a bacteria could have any role in harming the
          environment.
     (B) the capacity of microbiologists to analyze bacteria in a laboratory
          setting.
     (C) this bacteria’s utility in consuming massive plastic deposits.
     (D) the possibility of plastic extending the length it needs to
          biodegrade.

   Answer Explanation
Start by reading and paraphrasing the text so you have a clear idea of what
it is about. The text outlines the problem that microplastics pose to the
environment: millions of tons of plastic are produced, and microplastics are
ingested by different organisms. Moreover, it takes hundreds of years for
the plastic debris to disintegrate, causing a long-term negative impact on the
environment. Towards the end of the text, the author notes that some have
proposed using microorganisms to help consume plastic waste. In the final
sentence, the author acknowledges the opposite view of those who are
skeptical about this claim. So, it is most logical to complete the text with
something that states what it is that the skeptics would question. It is not
(A) because this would be the opposite meaning of what is needed here—if
it had said “helping” instead of “harming,” perhaps this would work. It is
not (B) because the question is about whether microorganisms can help
remove plastic, not about whether scientists can analyze bacteria in a lab. It
is not (D) because there is no discussion of possibly modifying the span of
time needed for plastic to degrade. Choice (C) is correct because this
summarizes the claim about which the skeptics would have questions.
Practice Questions
 1. Companies like FedEx have grown to be an integral part of the
    American landscape. FedEx first specialized in overnight deliveries
    via aircraft and then grew into a full-service provider using a truck
    network in conjunction with air transport. “When it absolutely,
    positively has to be there overnight” is its mantra, and it basically
    provides certainty of service for a premium price that consumers are
    willing to bear. Therefore, __________
    Which choice most logically completes the text?
     (A) businesses that want to ship products will primarily utilize air
         transport instead of land transport.
     (B) customers who use overnight delivery services are primarily
         concerned with reliability.
     (C) other companies do not focus the reliability of their shipping
         process in their marketing initiatives.
     (D) people who want to use overnight delivery services put a
         premium on cost savings.
 2. There is a natural tendency to confuse change with progress. This is
    perfectly understandable, especially considering that we went from
    inventing electricity to perfecting aviation to reaching the moon all in
    a time analogous to just a blink in the grand scheme of human history.
    Such prodigious leaps have left us hungry for more leaps, and there
    are benefits to restlessness, even if entropic; __________
    Which choice most logically completes the text?
     (A) systematic, focused research will lead to a successful result.
     (B) amateur researchers should be put on equal footing with
         academic researchers.
     (C) nearly all useful recent innovations have come as the result of
         chaotic creativity.
     (D) throw enough aimless darts in every direction and you’ll find a
         bull’s eye, even if by accident.
3. Many parents, as they lovingly tuck their children into bed, repeat a
   short rhyme that has been around for centuries: night-night, sleep
   tight, don’t let the bedbugs bite! This phrase refers to a time when
   even the wealthy had to deal with the constant scourge of bedbugs and
   other pests that preyed on sleeping humans. With the advent of
   modern pesticides, bedbugs were, for a time, largely an issue of the
   past. However, in the past few years they have come back with a
   vengeance, __________
   Which choice most logically completes the text?
    (A) as modern science has successfully eradicated the threat of
        bedbugs.
    (B) once again plaguing people rich and poor and proving very
        difficult to eradicate.
    (C) given the lack of interest that modern city dwellers have in
        attaining a good night’s rest.
    (D) since the anatomy of bedbugs are now better understood thanks
        to advances in technology.
4. Our nation’s heroes are not the only ones who may experience the
   detrimental effects of fireworks. Furry companions also can be
   frightened by the loud blasts above for nights on end. Veterinary
   practices, animal shelters, and other animal organizations frequently
   send out reminders in the weeks leading up to the Fourth of July to
   protect our pets from running away out of fright. These may include
   reminders to microchip our pets, keep pets indoors, and take pets on
   walks early in the day in case they are too afraid to relieve themselves
   during the fireworks. Their efforts are not without reason. In fact,
   __________
   Which choice most logically completes the text?
    (A) many pets enjoy the spectacle of fireworks just as much as their
        human counterparts.
    (B) veterinarians recommend that pet owners should take their pets
        to firework displays.
    (C) days on which fireworks are displayed statistically have the
        same number of pet injuries as days on which fireworks are not
        displayed.
    (D) more pets run away on the night of the Fourth of July than any
        other night of the year.
5. Since the transition from alkylation to acylation for benzene reactions,
   chemists’ abilities to safely modify benzene have expanded
   exponentially. What seemed revolutionary in the late 1800s is now
   part of undergraduate organic chemistry experiments in courses
   throughout universities worldwide. Benzene is no longer solely
   thought of as a carcinogenic and volatile compound. It now used in a
   variety of products including plastics, drugs, pesticides, detergents,
   etc. Its importance to modern chemistry, materials science and
   pharmaceuticals is therefore __________
   Which choice most logically completes the text?
    (A) unquestioned in the scientific community.
    (B) a subject of great debate among practicing chemists.
    (C) ridiculed by economists and politicians.
    (D) a matter on which the jury is still out.
6. Varroa mites are an issue for bee colonies for several reasons. The
   primary issue is that they attach themselves to the bodies of worker
   bees and feed on them. This can affect a bee’s immune system, ability
   to flush out pesticides, and regulation of hormones. When the mite
   abandons the bee for a fresh host, it leaves behind an open wound
   which often leads to infection by one of the many bee viruses that the
   mites carry. The overall effect is that the bees are much weaker when
   mites are present. This weakness means that worker bees __________
   Which choice most logically completes the text?
    (A) become increasingly able to thrive given their auspicious
        circumstances.
    (B) are much less able to perform their crucial tasks as they try to
        maintain the colony.
    (C) are animals that live in colonies under the control of a queen bee
        that they protect.
    (D) will increase their overall capacity to benefit other members of
        the bee colony.
7. One of the primary effects of social media use that has already been
   observed in populations that utilize social media regularly is a
   decrease in mental health and self-esteem. As far back as 1998, a
   study showed that increased social media use correlated with
   decreased in-person interactions with their friends and family. This
   was hypothesized to lead to issues with symptoms of depression. As
   modern social media developed, this decrease in personal face-to-face
   interactions increased. In England a recent study by the National
   Institute of Health (NIH) found a significant correlation between
   social media usage and symptoms of depression in high school aged
   subjects. This correlation was not found among older social media
   users. Of course, correlation is not causation: __________
   Which choice most logically completes the text?
    (A) depression most likely comes because of using social media.
    (B) social media use is not associated with an increased likelihood
        of depression.
    (C) an increase in depression is associated with a decrease in social
        media use.
    (D) already depressed people could just tend to use social media
        more.
8. It’s fair to say that the world in which we live is made up of chemicals,
    though the cultural emphasis in recent years on natural or “organic”
    products has somewhat demonized this notion. “Chemophobia,” in
    fact, is a term that has emerged to describe the irrational fear of
    chemistry and chemical nomenclature. In general, individuals affected
    by chemophobia tend to view the precisely planned manipulation of
    molecular compounds with suspicion, and perceive products rendered
    by these means as both “unnatural” and inherently inferior to those
    derived through cruder avenues. In reality, __________
     Which choice most logically completes the text?
      (A) nothing could be more natural than the intricate, multistep
          reactions of organic chemistry.
      (B) artificial substances present a clear and present danger to the
          health and safety of humans.
      (C) psychology provides a more promising avenue for the
          improvement of wellbeing than does chemistry.
      (D) organic agriculture provides a safe alternative to commercial
          crops raised with chemical fertilizers.
 9. The first way that many teachers approach classroom discipline is the
    “permissive” approach. To relate to the students, the teachers put up
    very few personal barriers. Positive outcomes in contrast with
    negative consequences are emphasized. What does the permissive
    classroom look like? Teachers let the students take control, asking for
    them to act properly rather than demanding it. Looking at their
    teachers as friends, the students do not look at them as authority
    figures. Students may like their teachers but will probably not respect
    them. Detentions are not an option, but extra credit for good behavior
    is abundant. Little actual learning can proceed in a classroom like this
    since __________
     Which choice most logically completes the text?
      (A) respect will be maintained.
      (B) chaos will reign.
      (C) punishment is freely meted out.
      (D) trust is encouraged.
10. Although the signaling pathway for light production in fireflies is
     complex enough, the methods by which different species regulate their
     luminescence are as various as the uses for luminescence that those
     species employ. As we have seen, fireflies tend to use their light to
     attract a mate, but females of one large species of firefly have been
     known to mimic the glow pattern of another, smaller variety, to attract
     males of the smaller species and eat them. Similarly, __________
    Which choice most logically completes the text?
     (A) Amazonian spiders craft nearly invisible webs that they use to
          trap their dinner.
     (B) bats use echolocation, a capacity akin to sonar, to locate food
          sources despite a dark environment.
     (C) the deep-sea dwelling anglerfish uses its glowing appendage to
          lure in unsuspecting prey.
     (D) humans who camp sometimes utilize global positioning systems
          in addition to their compasses should they become lost.

Answer Explanations
 1. (B) The text makes clear that customers who want overnight delivery
    are primarily concerned with “reliability.” Customers are willing to
    pay “a premium price” for this “certainty,” so it’s reasonable to
    assume that reliability is most important. The other options do not
    connect to the primacy of reliability.

 2. (D) The text implies that restlessness can be beneficial to scientific
    discovery—choice (D) expresses this idea by saying that if you try to
    throw enough darts around, you’ll eventually get a bull’s eye, i.e., a
    success. It is not (A) because “entropic” means “chaotic,” which
    would not make sense with a systematic approach. It is not (B)
    because the focus is on the usefulness of restlessness, not on whether
    amateurs are going to be successful. It is not (C) because this is too
    extreme in this context, stating that “nearly all” innovations are
    coming from this type of thinking.
 3. (B) Immediately before this, the author states that bedbugs have
    “come back with a vengeance.” Choice (B) is the most logical option
    in that it states that people from all different walks of life are
    susceptible to bedbugs. It is not (A) because this is the opposite of
    what is being argued. It is not (C) because there is no evidence that
    modern city dwellers no longer care about getting enough rest. It is
    not (D) because there is no evidence in the text about an increased
    understanding of the anatomy of bedbugs.
4. (D) The insertion here should elaborate on why the efforts to keep
   animals safe on the Fourth of July are not without reason. Choice (D)
   accomplishes this aim by stating that more pets run away on this night
   than any other. It is not (A) because the focus in the text is on the
   danger to pets, not on their entertainment. It is not (B) because this
   goes against the recommendations of pet organizations. It is not (C)
   because this would contradict the author’s argument about the Fourth
   of July with its fireworks presenting a greater-than-average risk to
   animals.

5. (A) The text emphasizes how benzene went from something that was
   revolutionary in chemistry research to something that is used in a wide
   variety of important products. Thus, it is most logical to state that its
   importance is “unquestioned in the scientific community.” It is not (B)
   or (D) because the debate about its importance has been settled. It is
   not (C) because with its widespread importance, benzene is certainly
   not ridiculed.

6. (B) The text presents the problems that varroa mites pose to bee
   colony vitality. Choice (B) expands on this by giving a concrete
   consequence of the impact that varroa mites will have on bees. It is
   not (A) or (D) because these would be positive outcomes. It is not (C)
   because this is merely a definition of what a bee is, instead of a
   statement about the impact that varroa mites have on bees.
7. (D) The previous part of the sentence, that “correlation is not
   causation,” means that just because two things happen simultaneously,
   it cannot be concluded that one event is the cause of the other. Also,
   the previous part of the sentence sets up a transition from the previous
   material with the phrase “of course,” indicating a contrast. Choice (D)
   is the most logical since it would show that social media is not
   necessarily the cause of depression; it may be something merely
   associated with people who are already depressed. It is not (A)
   because this is the opposite of what is needed. It is not (B) or (C)
   because these choices focus on the possibility of direct correlations
   instead of a lack of connection.
 8. (A) The earlier part of the text refers to how those with chemophobia
    believe that manipulation of chemical compounds is inherently
    unnatural. This excerpt shows that this is not the case. In fact,
    manipulating things with organic chemistry is quite natural. It is not
    (B) because this would not provide a contrast. It is not (C) or (D)
    because these are irrelevant to what is being discussed—
    transformation of compounds.

 9. (B) The text outlines the permissive approach to classroom discipline,
    in which students get to run the classroom, respect is lacking, and
    detentions are not possible. It would make sense to say that in a
    classroom like this in which little learning is taking place that “chaos
    will reign.” The other options contradict the description of what a
    classroom managed in the permissive style will be like.

10. (C) We need to come up with a situation that is like the one outlined in
     the previous sentence. One species of firefly uses its glow to attract
     food. Similarly, in choice (C), the anglerfish uses its glow to lure prey.
     Choices (A) and (B) discuss how animals can find food, but they use
     different methods from what the firefly does. Choice (D) does not
     focus on food location.


Additional Practice Exercises
The problems in these exercises represent the variety of SAT Reading
questions you could encounter. Take about ten minutes for each exercise.

Additional Practice Drill 1
 1. Veterinary students will research, diagnose, and treat medical
    conditions of pets, livestock, and other animals. Some will
    __________ companion animals and work in private clinics and
    hospitals, while others will choose to work with farm animals or in
    research facilities.
   Which choice completes the text with the most logical and precise
   word or phrase?
    (A) specialize in
    (B) be hired by
    (C) despair about
    (D) become ill from
2. Relaxation strategies are used across disciplines to address a wide
   variety of diagnoses. These strategies are beneficial in managing
   anxious feelings and feelings of not being __________ Relaxation
   techniques are used to address stress and impulse management. Some
   approaches may include meditation, progressive muscle relaxation,
   yoga, deep breathing, progressive muscle relaxation, and personal
   mantras.
   Which choice completes the text with the most logical and precise
   word or phrase?
    (A) away from one another.
    (B) across the way.
    (C) in debt to someone.
    (D) in control of oneself.
3. In 1970, Norman Borlaug was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize and
    credited with saving over a billion people from starvation. In what is
    now called the Green Revolution, Borlaug led the research and
    development over a two-decade span beginning in the 1940’s to
    dramatically increase agricultural production worldwide. He
    introduced the synthetic farming methods already common in the
    United States and Britain to a global market, focusing particularly on
    the developing world, and succeeded in hiking food production and
    saving lives. Borlaug’s initiative calls for celebration.
   As used in the text, what does the word “common” most nearly mean?
    (A) Widespread
    (B) Lowly
    (C) Communal
    (D) Corporate
4. The following text is from Nathaniel Hawthorne’s 1852 novel The
   Blithedale Romance.
   Happy the man that has such a man beside him when he comes to die!
   And unless a friend like Hollingsworth be at hand—as most probably
   there will not—he had better make up his mind to die alone. How
   many men, I wonder, does one meet with, in a lifetime, whom he
   would choose for his death-bed companion? At the crisis of my fever,
   I besought Hollingsworth to let nobody else enter the room, but
   continually to make me sensible of his own presence, by a grasp of the
   hand, a word, a prayer, if he thought good to utter it; and that then he
   should be the witness to how courageously I would encounter the
   worst.
   Which choice best states the main purpose of the text?
    (A) To recount a generally light-hearted anecdote for the reader
    (B) To describe a character for whom the narrator is quite grateful
    (C) To contemplate the meaning of life at the outset of a hopeful
        journey
    (D) To interrogate another character about his suitability for a
        position
5. Text 1
   When a couple gets married, a classic purchase is the diamond
   engagement ring. There are many different styles to choose from:
   round, princess, cushion, emerald, and marquise. A lot of thought is
   given to the specifications of the ring; given its significant cost, it is
   something for which the purchaser might save for quite some time.
   Often missed, however, is the story behind the diamond. The first use
   of diamond engagement rings was in Austria in 1477. Since then,
   these jewels have been sought after and shaped into glittering
   centerpieces atop gold bands.
   Text 2
   A new option has become available in the wedding industry—lab-
   created diamonds. These diamonds are not found naturally in the
   environment but created in a laboratory. What makes this option so
   appealing to buyers is that these artificially created diamonds are 50–
   60% less expensive than a naturally mined diamond. Because of this,
   the popularity for laboratory jewels has been skyrocketing.
   Based on the texts, how might the “couple” in Text 1 most likely
   respond to the notion of lab-created diamonds in Text 2?
    (A) By questioning the lack of statistical evidence in the text
    (B) By considering it as a possibility to save money for an important
        purchase
    (C) By dismissing the need to purchase an expensive symbol of love
    (D) By disputing the historical origins of a recent invention
6. Could robots soon be delivering your mail? Allow me to set the scene:
   you’re coming home from school, walking toward your front door,
   and bam—a flying robot drops your oldest sister’s just-ordered movie
   collection on your front porch. This is not as farfetched as it sounds.
   Today is the age of the drone, also known as the unmanned aerial
   vehicle (UAV), so __________
   Which choice most logically completes the text?
    (A) it is difficult to predict what the future holds.
    (B) it’s only a matter of time before it becomes an everyday
         occurrence.
    (C) advances in technology will lead to revolutionary health care
         treatments.
    (D) nothing can replace the personal touch of a human delivering
         your order.
7. In the past, politicians have touted their “trickle down” policies as
    being in the best interest of everyday Americans. It was commonly
    thought that tax breaks and other assistance for companies and
    individuals at the top would lead the wealth to slowly move down to
    middle class and impoverished families. Many politicians still use the
     trickle-down argument when pushing for aid to large corporations and
     wealthy individuals. After all, it makes sense that a wealthy person
     who comes into money will spend that money and that money will end
     up in the hands of service people and other workers. Economists,
     however, have struggled to find evidence of such policies helping
     anyone but those at the top.
     Which statement, if true, would most directly support the claim of the
     “economists” mentioned in the last sentence?
     (A) An investigation of recent political rhetoric demonstrating the
         popularity of the “trickle down” argument.
     (B) Statistics showing an increase in poverty in towns that have had
         recent factory closures by major businesses.
     (C) A historical analysis showing increased economic stratification
         after tax breaks for the wealthy are implemented.
     (D) A survey of the economic beliefs of wealthy individuals that
         indicates a preference for “trickle down” political policies.
8.
Source: https://www.census.gov/en.html

       Despite significant advances in medicine, there has been a limited
       increase in human longevity. While there are certainly many
       octogenarians and nonagenarians, this is more the exception than the
       rule. Most of the population is younger, not older.
       Which choice best describes data from the graph that supports the
       conclusion outlined in the text?
       (A) The majority of the 2015 U.S. population was under 40 years of
            age.
       (B) It is about three times as likely that a randomly selected U.S.
            citizen is in their 40s or 50s as it is that they would be in their
         60s or 70s.
     (C) Women represent a slight minority of the overall U.S.
         population.
     (D) Significant numbers of Americans in 2015 were in their 80s and
         90s.

Answer Explanations
 1. (A) The text starts by saying what veterinary students will generally
    do in their studies and careers. It then goes on to say what some will
    specifically do—thus, “specialize in” makes the most sense. (B) is
    illogical since the companion animals would not do the hiring. It is not
    (C) because feeling despair about companion animals for no particular
    reason would be unsuitable for a veterinary student. It is not (D)
    because it is unlikely that the students would become ill from
    companion animals, and this is inconsistent with the statement later in
    the sentence.

 2. (D) The text highlights how relaxation strategies can help address
    impulse management, which goes along with being “in control of
    oneself.” The other options have to do with interpersonal or physical
    interactions, not personal feeling management.

 3. (A) The text refers to Borlaug’s contribution to ending worldwide
    poverty and hunger, stating that he extended the farming methods
    “already common in the United States and Britain.” Since this is
    referring to their prevalence, “widespread” is the correct choice.
    “Lowly” means of low importance. “Communal” and “corporate”
    would imply that the methods were literally shared among members of
    a community.

 4. (B) The narrator describes how helpful a friend Hollingsworth has
    been to him in his time of illness—in other words, the narrator is
    describing a character for whom he is grateful, going with choice (B).
    It is not (A) because this is not a light-hearted anecdote; rather, it is
    about a serious topic. It is not (C) because the narrator is not trying to
    figure out the meaning of life. It is not (D) because the narrator is not
    intensively questioning another character.

5. (B) The “couple” in Text 1 is likely to want to purchase a diamond
   engagement ring when they become engaged to be married. Text 1
   emphasizes that a diamond purchase is considered “classic,”
   something about which “a lot of thought” will be devoted, and
   something for which the purchaser might save for a while. Therefore,
   it makes sense that for a major purchase, the couple might be
   interested in learning more about the lab-created diamonds mentioned
   in Text 2 so that they could explore it as a way of possibly saving
   money. It is not (A) because there is not a lack of statistical evidence
   in Text 2. It is not (C) because the importance of this purchase is
   emphasized. It is not (D) because there is no dispute about the
   historical origins of this technique—the likely dilemma is whether to
   purchase a naturally made or artificially created diamond.
6. (B) Earlier in the text it states that drone delivery is “not as farfetched
   as it sounds,” so it is logical to complete the text by stating that it is
   only a matter of time before such deliveries become commonplace. It
   is not (A) because the narrator is indeed making a prediction. It is not
   (C) because the text is not focused on health care treatments. It is not
   (D) because this is not relevant to the claim that the passage is
   making.
7. (C) The economists claim that trickle-down economics will mainly
   benefit those at the top of the economic ladder. Therefore, a historical
   analysis that shows increased divides between rich and poor (i.e.,
   stratification) after the implementation of tax breaks for the wealthy
   would help make this case. It is not (A) because the question is not
   about political popularity but about economic consequences. It is not
   (B) because factory closures are not directly attributable to the tax
   changes the economists are referencing. It is not (D) because a survey
   of wealthy individuals will not give clear evidence as to the society-
   wide merit of such policies.
 8. (A) The text states that there has been a limited increase in human
    longevity, and that most of the population is younger, not older.
    Choice (A) provides evidence for this, showing that the U.S.
    population is primarily under 40 years of age. It is not (B) because this
    only focuses on Americans over 40 years of age. It is not (C) because
    there is no information about gender in the graph. It is not (D) because
    2% could not reasonably be described as “significant numbers.”

Additional Practice Drill 2
 1. Although open online courses have failed to transform higher
    education in the abrupt manner that many reformers predicted, the
    current push for discernible and accessible digital __________ from
    accredited institutions will be a turning point in education. This will
    result in students having the documentation necessary to demonstrate
    to potential employers that they have the skills needed to succeed in
    the workforce.
     Which choice completes the text with the most logical and precise
     word or phrase?
     (A) lessons
     (B) credentials
     (C) instruction
     (D) interaction
 2. Inadequate sleep affects the nervous system through decreased ability
     for memory and learning. Lack of sleep __________ the endocrine
     system by, among other things, disrupting cortisol regulation and
     metabolism.
     Which choice completes the text with the most logical and precise
     word or phrase?
     (A) inspects
     (B) impacts
     (C) forbids
     (D) improves
3. An earthquake with a magnitude of 3.0–3.9 is called a “minor
   earthquake.” These can usually be felt by most people, but very rarely
   cause any damage. Often, people end up attributing these small quakes
   to other causes like large trucks passing or large public transit
   vehicles. Earthquakes on the higher end of this range may cause slight
   shaking of household objects.
   As used in the text, what does the word “slight” most nearly mean?
    (A) Mild
    (B) Quick
    (C) Luminous
    (D) Irrelevant
4. At the forefront of my desire to spend a semester or two abroad is
   personal growth. The evidence is empirical: a survey by the Institute
   for the International Education of Students found that studying abroad
   was a defining moment in a young person’s life that continues to
   impact them long after their domestic return. In fact, 98% of the 3,400
   respondents allowed that their experience abroad had left them with a
   better understanding of themselves, their cultural values, and their
   biases. Increased tolerance, compassion, and confidence are a few of
   the advantages. The individual change that occurs when studying
   abroad is a dynamic that works from the inside out—you become a
   better human being and opportunity arises for a better world.
   What choice best describes the overall structure of the text?
    (A) A thesis followed by consideration of objections to the thesis
    (B) A statistical analysis of an educational dilemma coupled with a
        plan of action
    (C) A suggestion of a possible course of action along with self-
        reflection
    (D) A statement of a goal followed by supporting reasons for that
        goal
5. A classroom that fails to challenge a student’s fundamental principles
   and create a hunger for lifetime learning fails altogether. Whether
   teaching the humanities or the sciences, the educator is the one who
   lays out a puzzle and pilots instances of profound, sublime
   enlightenment. A student lucky enough to study under a true teacher is
   never satisfied, but instead, is relentlessly looking for answers.
   What choice best describes the function of the underlined sentence in
   the text as a whole?
    (A) It emphasizes how an excellent teacher will inspire their
         students to be curious.
    (B) It provides a counterexample to the primary claim of the text.
    (C) It elaborates on the specific methods that a teacher can use to
         achieve a goal.
    (D) It portrays the likely career trajectory for a prospective educator.
6. Text 1
   For most of western history, head coverings in the forms of hats and
   scarves have been the norm. Only in the last 40 years have hats for
   everyday use gone out of style to the point where anything other than
   a baseball cap is considered odd or pretentious. No longer is it
   considered a sign of politeness or culture to cover one’s head, and that
   convention is not coming back. Hat fashion is dead; hair fashion is
   here to stay.
   Text 2
   The recent decrease in hat wearing is merely a blip on the radar of
   fashion. Large-brimmed hats are common for beach wear, and the
   bucket hat is making a resurgence for both men and women. People
   like hats not just for warmth or sun protection, but also as a fashion
   statement. Hats may add an extra layer of fiddlyness to an outfit, but
   when done well they enhance the look exponentially. People are
   remembering this, and hats are coming back.
   How would the author of Text 2 most likely respond to the statement
   “Hat fashion is dead” in Text 1?
    (A) By wholeheartedly agreeing with it.
     (B) By moderately agreeing with it.
     (C) By strongly disagreeing with it.
     (D) By being indifferent to it.
7. It is safe to say no one posts any picture of themselves looking
    anything less than their best. They don’t post about the boredom of
    their internship, their “staying-in” sweatpants, or the ramen noodles
    they eat most evenings for dinner. This creates a false online
    environment. People logging into Instagram after school each day see
    what appears to be all their friends and acquaintances living amazing
    and exciting lives. As they eat a frozen dinner and try to decide what
    to watch on Netflix, people scroll through engaging and perfect
    pictures and feel __________
     Which choice most logically completes the text?
     (A) satisfied that they can stay in touch with friends in other cities.
     (B) worse about themselves and their seemingly inferior lives.
     (C) personally fulfilled with the intellectual stimulation they find.
     (D) a desire to improve their computer fluency through additional
         study.
8.
Adapted from the Bureau of Labor Statistics


       Occupational therapy is a healthcare profession that uses holistic
       therapeutic practices to enable patients to regain their quality of life.
       The field of occupational therapy is growing, with significant gains in
       employment relative to employment in other potential careers.
       Which choice best describes data from the graph that supports the
       conclusion expressed in the text?
       (A) The Bureau of Labor Statistics projects that occupational
           therapy assistants saw increased career prospects when
           compared to occupational therapists; in fact, the difference
           between the two is approximately 14%.
       (B) The Bureau of Labor Statistics estimates that there was an
           increase in employment for occupational therapists of 29%
           between 2012 and 2022, whereas the estimate for the increase in
           all jobs is 11%.
       (C) The Bureau of Labor Statistics estimates that the employment
           for occupational therapists increased 43% between 2012 and
           2022. The estimate for the increase in all jobs is 11%.
       (D) The Bureau of Labor Statistics estimates that the employment
           for occupational therapists increased 11% between 2012 and
           2022. The estimate for the increase in all jobs is 29%.

Answer Explanations
 1. (B) “Credentials” would be documentation that show someone’s
    readiness for a particular career, making this the most logical option.
    While the other words could be helpful preparing students for the
    workforce, they will not necessarily result in usable documentation
    that employers can review.
 2. (B) An appropriate synonym would be “affects” since the lack of sleep
    with affect the systems of the body. “Impacts” is most synonymous
    with this word. The other options do not align with “affects.”
3. (A) “Mild” is an appropriate word since the text refers to “minor
   earthquakes.” The other choices do not accurately depict a level of
   severity or magnitude.
4. (D) The narrator states their goal of wanting to spend a semester or
   two abroad; the narrator then goes on to provide specific reasons why
   this is a worthy goal. All of this aligns with choice (D). It is not (A)
   because the narrator does not focus on considering objections. It is not
   (B) because the narrator provides just one statistic—this cannot be
   considered a statistical analysis of a dilemma. It is not (C) because the
   narrator is not doing self-reflection but is convincing the reader of the
   worthiness of this goal.

5. (A) The text overall is focused on showing what makes for a good
   classroom environment, with this final sentence showing how students
   who learn under a “true teacher” will be perpetually curious. This goes
   along with choice (A). It is not (B) because it complements the text
   rather than contradicts it. It is not (C) because it makes a broad rather
   than a specific statement. It is not (D) because it does not get into
   career specifics.

6. (C) The author of Text 2 asserts that hats are making a comeback, so it
   is most logical to state that the author of Text 2 would strongly
   disagree with this statement. The other options do not capture the
   precise likely opinion.

7. (C) The narrator emphasizes how social media posting leads to a
   “false online environment” that makes it seem like other people are
   living amazing and exciting lives. This would logically lead to some
   people feeling worse about their own personal situations by
   comparison. It is not (A) because the users are not described as
   actively conversing with friends, but rather passively watching the
   activities of others. It is not (C) because there is no emphasis on
   personal fulfillment. It is not (D) because the use of social media is
   not described as academic in this context.
 8. (B) Based on the first column at the top of the graph, all occupations
    experienced an 11% growth from 2012–2022, and based on the middle
    column of the graph, occupational therapists experienced a 29%
    increase in employment in the same period. The other options give
    incorrect information based on the graph.

Advanced Drills
The following questions are designed to represent the most challenging
sorts of questions you could encounter on the SAT Reading. Take about ten
minutes for each exercise.

Advanced Drill 1
 1. Oils, which contain primarily nonpolar hydrocarbon bonds, are
    immiscible with aqueous solutions, meaning they will not
    spontaneously dissolve in water, which consists of highly polar
    hydrogen-oxygen bonds. Instead, oils will tend to form a film over
    polar solvents, while surface tension serves to stabilize this film at the
    oil-water interface. Because they are amphiphilic—meaning they
    possess both polar and nonpolar domains—surfactants may interact
    with both components of this interface and interfere with the
    electrochemical forces that maintain its integrity. Due to this unique
    property, surface tension lowering agents have found a host of
    applications in diverse commercial products, and are used as
    emulsifiers, foaming agents, and detergents.
     As used in the text, what does the word “integrity” most nearly mean?
     (A) Rectitude
     (B) Solidarity
     (C) Cohesion
     (D) Decadence
 2. At the risk of oversimplifying, soaps are created by exposing
    triglycerides gathered from either plant or animal sources to a strong
    base in a process called saponification. The base hydrolyzes
    triglycerides to form glycerol and amphipathic free fatty acids. The
   glycerol, in turn, is removed, and the fatty acids are complexed with
   sodium. While the words “soap” and “detergent” are sometimes used
   interchangeably in common parlance, one should note that detergents
   are not synthesized by saponification.
   The author’s overall description of soaps and detergents is that they
   are
    (A) commonly thought of as interchangeable but in fact having an
        important difference.
    (B) one and the same insofar as their chemical properties, such as
        molecular structure.
    (C) different with respect to their capacity to mix in emulsions.
    (D) major obstacles to the widespread acceptance of biosurfactants.
3. The following excerpt is from James Joyce’s 1916 novel A Portrait of
   the Artist as a Young Man.
      The snares of the world were its ways of sin. He would fall. He had
      not yet fallen but he would fall silently, in an instant. Not to fall
      was too hard, too hard; and he felt the silent lapse of his soul, as it
      would be at some instant to come, falling, falling, but not yet
      fallen, still unfallen, but about to fall.
   The tone of the text is best described as one of
    (A) resignation.
    (B) terror.
    (C) corruption.
    (D) decreasing.
4. The following excerpt is from Meditations on First Philosophy, by
   René Descartes, 1641, in which he muses about the nature of
   knowledge.
   But it may be said, perhaps, that, although the senses occasionally
   mislead us respecting minute objects, and such as are so far removed
   from us as to be beyond the reach of close observation, there are yet
   many other of their informations (presentations), of the truth of which
   it is manifestly impossible to doubt; as for example, that I am in this
   place, seated by the fire, clothed in a winter dressing gown, that I hold
   in my hands this piece of paper.
   The main purpose of the text is to illustrate Descartes’ thinking about
    (A) the pitfalls of human perception.
    (B) the superiority of logical reasoning.
    (C) the importance of proper observational tools.
    (D) the spectrum of sensory certainty.
5. Within the red blood cell, hemoglobin exists as a four-subunit
   complex, or “tetramer,” each subunit of which is made up of one
   “heme” metalloprotein, and one of several varieties of “globin.”
   Comprised of iron and a carbon-nitrogen ring, heme is responsible for
   both the oxygen-binding capacity of hemoglobin, and for the red
   coloration of blood. Globin, meanwhile, refers to a folded chain of
   polypeptides, and it is the combination of these chains that imparts
   each type of hemoglobin with its unique characteristics.
   Based on the text, what makes the hemoglobin varieties distinct?
    (A) Whether there is a carbon-nitrogen ring
    (B) Whether there is a red coloration of the blood
    (C) Variation in the arrangement of metalloprotein chains
    (D) Variation in the arrangement of polypeptide chains
6. The following text is adapted from 1894 short story “The End of
   Books,” by Octave Uzanne. In this story, a group of gentlemen gather
   after dinner to discuss what they think the future holds. Eventually
   they come to the topic of the future of books, and the following
   monologue is given by one of the group.
   I take my stand upon this incontestable fact, that the man of leisure
   becomes daily more reluctant to undergo fatigue, that he eagerly seeks
   for what he calls the comfortable, that is to say for every means of
   sparing himself the play and the waste of the organs. You will surely
   agree with me that reading, as we practice it today, soon brings on
   great weariness; for not only does it require of the brain a sustained
   attention which consumes a large proportion of the cerebral
   phosphates but it also forces our bodies into various fatiguing
   attitudes. If we are reading one of our great newspapers it constrains
   us to acquire a certain dexterity in the art of turning and folding the
   sheets; if we hold the paper wide open it is not long before the
   muscles of tension are overtaxed, and finally, if we address ourselves
   to the book, the necessity of cutting the leaves and turning them one
   after another, ends by producing an enervated condition very
   distressing in the long run.
   According to the text, the narrator considers a major issue with
   reading to be
    (A) its physical demands.
    (B) its dull subject matter.
    (C) its intellectual requirements.
    (D) its obscure language.
7. The following text is from John Cobden’s 1854 book The White Slaves
   of England, published to decry the horrible working and living
   conditions among the poor working classes of England.
   Our plan has been to quote English authorities wherever possible. Out
   of their own mouths shall they be condemned. We have been much
   indebted to the publications of distinguished democrats of England,
   who have keenly felt the evils under which their country groans, and
   striven, with a hearty will, to remove them. They have the sympathies
   of civilized mankind with their cause. May their efforts soon be
   crowned with success, for the British masses and oppressed nations
   far away in the East will shout loud and long when the aristocracy is
   brought to the dust!
   Which choice best describes the function of the underlined sentence in
   the text as a whole?
    (A) It shares the heartfelt confessions of those who were formerly
         oppressors.
    (B) It considers the objections of those who dismiss democracy.
     (C) It expresses a desire to use the words of authorities against them.
     (D) It demonstrates the widespread acceptance of a point of view.
 8. Scientists have demonstrated that most animal genes participate in
    alternative splicing to one extent or another; far from a mere
    biochemical curiosity, it is a vital biological strategy to maximize the
    economy of genetic material, which must be laboriously reproduced
    with each cell division, while maintaining an immense diversity in the
    protein-encoding capacity of a genome. In an extreme example, the
    genome of the insect species Drosophila melanogaster contains the
    large sum of about 15,000 genes. Yet, through alternative splicing, one
    single D melanogaster gene—known as DSCAM—has been shown to
    encode as many as 38,000 different proteins.
     Based on the text, which expression gives the most likely range of
     values for the total number of proteins in a Drosophila melanogaster
     genome?
     (A) Number of total proteins = 15,000 + 38,000
     (B) Number of total proteins = 38,000 − 15,000
     (C) Number of total proteins ≤ 38,000 × 15,000
     (D) Number of total proteins > 38,000 / 15,000

Answer Explanations
 1. (C) From the context, we understand that surfactants reduce surface
    tension and can interfere with the stability of an oil-water film.
    Therefore, if its properties allow a surfactant to interfere with forces
    that maintain integrity, we can assume the proper word choice is
    “cohesion,” or “the act of sticking together.” “Rectitude” refers to
    another meaning of integrity, like “virtue.” “Decadence” is, then, the
    opposite of “rectitude.” “Solidarity,” while a tempting choice, usually
    refers to unity among a group of individuals.

 2. (A) The author makes sure to differentiate soaps and detergents even
    though they “are sometimes used interchangeably.” Choices (B) and
    (C) give misleading information that doesn’t account for the text’s
    explanation that they are neither identical in structure nor in creation.
    Choice (D) is incorrect because this is not referred to in the text.

3. (A) At the conclusion of the text, the narrator yields to his fate. He is
   “still unfallen, but about to fall,” so the best description of this tone
   would be resignation. “Terror” is too strong. “Corruption,” although
   related to sin, is not depictive of the narrator’s tone. “Decreasing”
   would be used improperly here since the tone is not lessening in size
   or strength.
4. (D) The text refers to Descartes’ acknowledgement that there are some
   truths that are “manifestly impossible to doubt.” As examples,
   Descartes presents sensory observations like his location, clothing,
   and current activities as occurrences of knowledge that he cannot
   refute. So, (D) is correct. He is emphasizing the certainties of human
   perception, rather than the pitfalls. Additionally, he is not referring to
   “logical reasoning” or “tools” but merely to fundamental senses.
5. (D) The text states that a combination of polypeptide chains accounts
   for the varieties of hemoglobin. Choices (A) and (B) refer to
   characteristics of the heme that each type of hemoglobin has in
   common. Choice (C) is imprecise because metalloprotein refers to
   collective heme, not to the distinct chains associated with the globin.

6. (A) Throughout this text, the author underscores the physical demands
   of reading in the printed form—needing to have “dexterity” to turn
   and fold the sheets and to hold the paper wide open. The author
   suggests that a “man of leisure” will be more and more unwilling to
   undergo fatigue and would therefore be open to a less physically
   demanding type of media. So, it is reasonable to infer that the physical
   demands of reading are what the author considers to be a major issue.
   Choices (B), (C), and (D) all could represent shortcomings of reading,
   but they are not mentioned in this text.
7. (C) In the previous sentence, the narrator says that the plan “has been
   to quote English authorities wherever possible,” indicating a desire to
   use the words of authorities against them. It is not choice (A) because
     there would be no need to condemn those who confessed in a heartfelt
     way. It is not (B) because the narrator is not trying to consider the
     objections of authorities, but to trap them in their contradictions. And
     it is not (D) because the narrator understands that English authorities
     likely have very different points of view from those whom they
     oppress.
 8. (C) We can find the number of proteins by multiplying how many
    genes there are by how many proteins they code for. The last sentence
    tells us that this particular gene—that codes for 38,000 proteins—is
    “an extreme example.” Therefore, if the genome has about 15,000
    genes, it is highly unlikely that they all encode for that many proteins.
    Hence, we can assume that the total number of proteins is less than
    15,000 multiplied by 38,000. In fact, even if the genes were all
    similarly extreme, (C) would still be correct because the total proteins
    would be equal to 15,000 multiplied by 38,000.

Advanced Drill 2
 1. Agricultural and biological engineers develop medicines, create better
    ways of growing and protecting our food supply, and, along with
    environmental engineers, help to create a cleaner, safer environment in
    which to breathe, grow food, and have safe drinking water. Even if
    you have not met such an engineer before, they have set an example of
    how to be good stewards of our resources, and we have all benefitted
    from what they have done for us.
     As used in the text, what does the word “stewards” most nearly mean?
     (A) Attendants
     (B) Curators
     (C) Assistants
     (D) Guardians
 2. The following text is adapted from Nathaniel Hawthorne’s 1852 novel
    The Blithedale Romance. Mr. Coverdale, an idealistic young man,
    who has recently moved onto a utopian communal farm, is recovering
   from a fever. He is attended first by Hollingsworth, a philanthropist,
   and second by Zenobia, a beautiful wealthy resident of the farm.
   All other members of the Community showed me kindness according
   to the full measure of their capacity. Zenobia brought me my gruel,
   every day, made by her own hands; and whenever I seemed inclined to
   converse, would sit by my bedside, and talk with so much vivacity as
   to add several gratuitous throbs to my pulse. Her poor little stories and
   tracts never half did justice to her intellect. It was only the lack of a
   fitter avenue that drove her to seek development in literature. She was
   made (among a thousand other things that she might have been) for a
   stump-oratress. I recognized no severe culture in Zenobia; her mind
   was full of weeds. It startled me, sometimes, in my state of moral as
   well as bodily faint-heartedness, to observe the hardihood of her
   philosophy.
   In the narrator’s view, what was the major factor that drove Zenobia
   into her primary intellectual pursuit?
    (A) Significant natural talent.
    (B) Her desire to shock her contemporaries.
    (C) Religious zeal.
    (D) A scarcity of opportunities.
3. The more compact and less delicate color camera designed by German
   photographer Adolf Miethe simply included a rotating filter disc,
   which allowed three photographs to be taken in rapid succession.
   From 1909 to 1915, Miethe’s design was used by his Russian protégé,
   Sergei Prokudin-Gorsky, in a project appointed to him by Czar
   Nicholas II to document visually the history, culture and
   modernization of the Russian Empire. His extensive and compelling
   work in the Russian provinces constitutes the first major series of
   color photojournalism. However, whenever a moving object was
   included in the frame—particularly water—the shortcomings of
   Miethe’s design became obvious. The consecutive of exposure of
   plates, however swift, would always leave some room for visual
   conflict between the three images.
   Based on the text, it can be logically concluded that a Miethe-designed
   camera could most successfully photograph a river under what
   weather conditions?
    (A) At high noon on a summer day with a light breeze
    (B) On a rainy, blustery day with mild flooding
    (C) On a freezing, windless day
    (D) Any form of water with equally low quality
4. Text 1 is adapted from Walt Whitman’s 1860 poem “I Hear America
   Singing.” Text 2 is adapted from Langston Hughes’s 1925 poem “I,
   Too.”
   Text 1
   I hear America singing, the varied carols I hear,
   Those of mechanics, each one singing his as it should be blithe and
   strong,
   The carpenter singing his as he measures his plank or beam,
   The mason singing his as he makes ready for work, or leaves off
   work,
   The boatman singing what belongs to him in his boat, the deckhand
   singing on the steamboat deck,
   The shoemaker singing as he sits on his bench, the hatter singing as he
   stands,
   The wood-cutter’s song, the ploughboy’s on his way in the morning,
   or at noon intermission or at sundown,
   The delicious singing of the mother, or of the young wife at work, or
   of the girl sewing or washing,
   Each singing what belongs to him or her and to none else,
   The day what belongs to the day—at night the party of young fellows,
   robust, friendly,
Singing with open mouths their strong melodious songs.
Text 2
I, too, sing America.
I am the darker brother.
They send me to eat in the kitchen
When company comes,
But I laugh,
And eat well,
And grow strong.
Tomorrow,
I’ll be at the table
When company comes.
Nobody’ll dare
Say to me,
“Eat in the kitchen,”
Then.
Besides,
They’ll see how beautiful I am
And be ashamed—
I, too, am America.
What best describes the different themes of Text 1 and Text 2
respectively?
(A) Career advancement and artistic awareness
    (B) Individual creation and racial inclusion
    (C) Musical talent and gustatory sensibility
    (D) Present day and distant past
5. Mites do not necessarily mean the end of bees. These mites are slow to
   spread in nature, and North America is a big place. However, because
   of commercial farming practices, there is a major concern that mites
   and their associated viruses could soon infect most colonies in North
   America. Most bees, despite what people think, do not just stay in one
   area. In fact, most hives do not stay in one area. They travel the
   country. Beekeepers in today’s agricultural setting rent out their bees
   to massive farms. One great example is the almond orchards in
   California. Natural bees in the area are not populous enough to
   pollinate the thousands and thousands of almond trees. So, apiarists
   (beekeepers) __________.
   Which choice most logically completes the text?
    (A) notify governmental authorities when bee populations become
         overly burdensome on the environment.
    (B) aid bees in their migratory journey away from the California
         orchards.
    (C) rent hives out to the almond farms for a few months each year to
         get the job done.
    (D) attain professional credentials through vocational agricultural
         programs.
6. The following text is from Harriet Beecher Stowe’s 1852 novel Uncle
   Tom’s Cabin.
   The prayer-meeting at Uncle Tom’s Cabin had been protracted to a
   very late hour, and Tom and his worthy helpmeet were not yet asleep,
   when between twelve and one there was a light tap on the
   windowpane.
   “Good Lord! what’s that?” said Aunt Chloe, starting up. “My sakes
   alive, if it aint Lizzy! Get on your clothes, old man, quick. I’m gwine
   to open the door.”
   And suiting the action to the word, the door flew open, and the light of
   the candle which Tom had hastily lighted, fell on the face of Eliza.
   “I’m running away, Uncle Tom and Aunt Chloe—carrying off my
   child. Master sold him.”
   Which choice best states the function of the underlined sentence in the
   text as a whole?
    (A) To show that Eliza feared unwanted detection
    (B) To demonstrate that Eliza respected nightly rituals
    (C) To highlight how Chloe was hesitant to share bad news
    (D) To express how Chloe understood her misdeeds
7. Eugène Boudin was a 19th-century French landscape painter who
   famously painted while outdoors. Which quotation from an article
   describing these paintings gives the best evidence that Boudin’s
   painting was characterized by subjects from a variety of
   socioeconomic classes?
    (A) “Though these works brought him very little financial profit, it
        is known that he was exceptionally fond of them.”
    (B) “Having worked as a bay fisherman in his youth, it has been
        claimed that Boudin was perhaps somewhat ashamed of his
        reputation as painter.”
    (C) “These works provide us with a compelling contrast to paintings
        by other artists of the languorous, well-to-do beach-goers.”
    (D) “Together they provide a rare, panoptical insight into the full
        social spectrum of French life by the sea in the mid-to-late 19th
        century.”
 8.




      A neonatal medical scientist claims that an examination of
      percentages of globin chains can give doctors a relatively clear idea of
      the age of both fetuses and children. The scientist claims that
      particular globin makeups will often correspond to particular ages.
      Based on the graph, a rough measurement of which of the following
      globin chains would give the clearest indication that a child was born
      two months premature?
      (A) Alpha
      (B) Beta
      (C) Gamma
      (D) Zeta

Answer Explanations
 1. (D) The text states that engineers have exemplified “how to be good
    stewards of our resources.” Before this statement, the author discusses
    how agricultural, biological, and environmental engineers have helped
    to create a cleaner, safer, and all-around higher quality environment
    for us. Hence, guardian, or “protector” is the closest meaning.
    Curators are keepers of museums. Finally, both attendants and
    assistants indicate helpers, so they are too tepid for this context.

2. (D) The text indicates that Coverdale believes that Zenobia pursued
   literature because there was a lack of a “fitter avenue” and that her
   literary works did not do justice to her intellect. So, her primary
   intellectual pursuit of literature was primarily a result of a lack of
   opportunities. Choices (A) and (B) both give characteristics that
   would apply to her mindset but would not hold her back. And while
   she has passion and zeal for her beliefs, there is no evidence that her
   zeal is religious in nature; even if it were, this would not hold her back
   from her goals.
3. (C) The second to the last sentence suggests that the major
   shortcoming of Miethe’s design was its inability to photograph
   properly moving objects because it needed a more expanded exposure
   time. If an object were relatively stable, as objects would likely be on
   a freezing, windless day, Miethe’s design would be more successful.
   Choices (A) and (B) would not work due to the presence of wind, and
   choice (D) would not work because frozen water would be more
   clearly photographed than moving water.

4. (B) The first poem focuses on how individuals create things through
   their various professions, doing so in a harmonious fashion. The
   second poem emphasizes the need to include people of color in
   America. So, the different themes of the texts are individual creation
   and racial inclusion, respectively. It is not (A) because Text 1 is not
   addressing the need for career advancement. It is not (C) because there
   is not a focus on taste and sensation in Text 2. It is not (D) because
   Text 2 is written from a present-day perspective, not one from the
   distant past.

5. (C) The text draws attention to the fact that bees and their hives can be
   moved from place to place and that there are not sufficient natural
   bees to pollinate the almond orchards in California. Therefore, it
     would be logical for beekeepers to help solve this problem by renting
     out their hives to the almond farms to help with pollination. It is not
     (A) because the previous sentence says that there is a lack of bees. It is
     not (B) because it wouldn’t make sense for the beekeepers to help
     bees move away from an area where they are needed. It is not (D)
     because this does not relate to the need for their specific services to
     solve the almond pollination problem.

 6. (A) It is safe to assume that the “light tap” is indicative of Eliza’s
    discretion, as she must be very secretive about her plans to run away.
    So, it is fitting to say that she is trying to avoid detection as in choice
    (A). Choice (C) is incorrect because we know she risked visiting Tom
    specifically to share the news. Choice (B) wrongly assumes her
    caution is related to offending Tom and Chloe by visiting them so late.
    Finally, (D) inaccurately assumes she is worried more about breaking
    the law than about being caught.
 7. (D) By referring to “the full social spectrum of French life,” Choice
    (D) gives the best evidence that Boudin’s painting was characterized
    by subjects from a variety of socioeconomic classes. The other options
    do not indicate that the subjects of his paintings would be from a
    variety of different social and economic classes.

 8. (B) To find the clearest indication that a child was born two months
    premature, we would want to determine the level of a particular
    hemoglobin protein that had an easily measurable and unique value at
    7 months of gestation—beta is approximately 20% at this point, and
    this is the only time that it meets the level. It is not (A) because the
    alpha maintains its 7-month percent for some time. It is not (C)
    because gamma is at its 7-month percent both at 7 months and at 5
    months. It is not (D) because zeta ceases to be a factor after 3 and half
    months of gestation.


Vocabulary Resources
50 Common Word Roots
Efficiently build your SAT vocabulary by studying these fifty common
word roots and their definitions as well as common SAT words that
incorporate these word roots.


 Root: Ab ______________________________________
Definition: away
SAT Words:
      abrogate (deny, repeal (make it go away))
      abstain (do away with)

 Root: Ambi ______________________________________
Definition: both
SAT Words:
   ambidextrous (able to use both hands)
   ambivalent (undecided; could go “both” ways)

 Root: Ambul ______________________________________
Definition: move or walk
SAT Words:
      ambulate (walk around)
      somnambulate (walk while sleeping)

 Root: Ami ______________________________________
Definition: love
SAT Words:
      amiable (pleasant and friendly)
      amicable (done in a friendly way)
      amity (friendship)
 Root: Contra ______________________________________
Definition: against
SAT Words:
      contradict (claim the opposite of another statement)
      contraposition (opposition)

 Root: Cred ______________________________________
Definition: believe
SAT Words:
      credible (believable)
      credulous (overly eager to believe something, gullible)
      incredulous (unwilling to believe)

 Root: Crypt ______________________________________
Definition: hidden
SAT Words:
      cryptic (having a mysterious meaning)
      decrypt (decode a secret message)
      encrypt (convert something into a secret code)

 Root: Cycl ______________________________________
Definition: circle or ring
SAT Words:
      cycloid (circular)
      cyclone (circular storm)
      cyclotron (a circular machine that physicists use to accelerate
      particles)

 Root: Dem ______________________________________
Definition: people
SAT Words:
      demagogue (a leader who appeals to popular prejudice instead of
      rationality)
      democracy (a government elected by the people)
      demography (the study of human population statistics)

 Root: Derm ______________________________________
Definition: skin
SAT Words:
      dermatology (a branch of medicine that is associated with the
      treatment of skin)
      hypodermic (related to the parts beneath the skin)
      intradermal (between the layers of the skin)

 Root: Dict ______________________________________
Definition: speak
SAT Words:
      edict (an order from an authority figure)
      indict (to formally accuse someone of a crime)
      malediction (a curse)

 Root: Domin ______________________________________
Definition: master
SAT Words:
      dominant (most powerful)
      domineering (controlling and overbearing)
      dominion (area of control)
 Root: Dur ______________________________________
Definition: hard
SAT Words:
      durable (able to withstand damage)
      endurance (capacity to last)
      obdurate (stubborn)

 Root: Ego ______________________________________
Definition: I, self
SAT Words:
      alter ego (second version of oneself)
      egomaniacal (obsessed with oneself)
      egotistical (self-centered)

 Root: Esth ______________________________________
Definition: feeling
SAT Words:
      aesthetic (associated with an appreciation for beauty)
      anesthetic (something that reduces painful sensations)

 Root: Extra ______________________________________
Definition: outside
SAT Words:
      extralegal (outside of the law)
      extraneous (outside of what is needed)
      extrapolate (to make a prediction based on past data and
      experiences)

 Root: Fid ______________________________________
Definition: faith
SAT Words:
      confidant (a person in whom you have faith and trust)
      fidelity (being faithful, loyal)
      perfidy (being faithless, disloyal)

 Root: Flect ______________________________________
Definition: bend
SAT Words:
      deflect (to divert something)
      genuflect (to bend on your knee to show respect)
      inflection (to make your voice rise and fall (to “bend” your voice))

 Root: Flor ______________________________________
Definition: flower
SAT Words:
      efflorescence (blossoming)
      florid (flowery)

 Root: Fract/Frag
______________________________________
Definition: break
SAT Words:
      fracture (to break)
      fragile (breakable)
      refract (to alter waves on a straight path)

 Root: Fug ______________________________________
Definition: run away
SAT Words:
      (fleeting)
      refugee (a person forced to leave his or her home)
      subterfuge (evasion, deceit)

 Root: Gen ______________________________________
Definition: birth, production
SAT Words:
      genesis (creation)
      genteel (well-bred, refined)
      progeny (descendants)

 Root: Gram ______________________________________
Definition: something written
SAT Words:
      epigram (a witty saying)
      monogram (a decorative design made of two or more letters)
      phonogram (a symbol that represents a spoken sound)

 Root: Graph ______________________________________
Definition: to write
SAT Words:
      bibliography (a list of scholarly sources)
      cosmography (a description of the universe)
      typography (the style of printed material)

 Root: Grat ______________________________________
Definition: pleasing
SAT Words:
      gratify (to give satisfaction)
      gratuitous (done freely, often unwarranted)
      ingratiate (to gain favor by helping someone)

 Root: Gress ______________________________________
Definition: to step, to go
SAT Words:
      digress (to go away from the main topic)
      egress (exit)
      transgress (to violate a law)

 Root: Hetero ______________________________________
Definition: different
SAT Words:
      heterodox (nonconformist)
      heterogeneous (diverse)
      heteromorphic (having different forms)

 Root: Homo ______________________________________
Definition: same
SAT Words:
      homogeneous (of the same type)
      homologous (similar, especially biologically)
      homophone (words with the same pronunciation but different
      meanings (e.g., “son” and “sun”))

 Root: Idio ______________________________________
Definition: peculiar, distinct
SAT Words:
      idiom (an expression that is distinct to native speakers of a language)
      idiosyncrasy (a peculiar characteristic of an individual)

 Root: Judi ______________________________________
Definition: judge, lawyer
SAT Words:
      adjudicate (to make a judgment)
      judicial (concerning the administration of justice)
      judicious (possessing sound judgment)

 Root: Ling ______________________________________
Definition: language
SAT Words:
      linguist (a person who studies languages)
      linguistics (the study of languages)

 Root: Loqu ______________________________________
Definition: speak
SAT Words:
      colloquial (used in informal conversation)
      eloquent (able to express oneself well)
      loquacious (talkative)

 Root: Magn ______________________________________
Definition: large, great
SAT Words:
      magnanimous (greatly noble in spirit)
      magnate (a greatly influential person)
      magnitude (greatness, size)
 Root: Mal ______________________________________
Definition: bad
SAT Words:
      malcontent (a difficult person)
      malevolent (showing evil intent)
      malign (evil)

 Root: Mut ______________________________________
Definition: change
SAT Words:
      immutable (unchangeable)
      permutation (a change in the arrangement of a set of items)
      transmute (to change in form)

 Root: Ob ______________________________________
Definition: against
SAT Words:
      obdurate (stubborn)
      obtrusive (unpleasantly noticeable)

 Root: Phil ______________________________________
Definition: love
SAT Words:
      philanthropist (a person who loves to help others, usually by
      donating money)
      philosophy (the study of knowledge (love of wisdom); a way of
      thinking)
      technophile (a person who loves advanced technology)
 Root: Plac ______________________________________
Definition: calm
SAT Words:
      complacent (unconcerned; self-satisfied)
      placate (to make someone less angry)
      placid (calm, peaceful)

 Root: Re ______________________________________
Definition: back, again
SAT Words:
      relegate (downgrade, lower)
      remunerate (to pay back for services)
      renege (to go back on a promise)

 Root: Sagac ______________________________________
Definition: wise
SAT Words:
      sagacious (having wisdom, good judgment)
      sagacity (wisdom)

 Root: Sang ______________________________________
Definition: having to do with blood
SAT Words:
      sanguinary (bloody or bloodthirsty)
      sanguine (cheerful and optimistic (being red-faced with hope rather
      than blue with despair))

 Root: Sequ ______________________________________
Definition: follow
SAT Words:
      consequently (as a result)
      obsequious (excessively obedient)
      subsequent (following in time)

 Root: Somn ______________________________________
Definition: sleep
SAT Words:
      insomnia (an inability to sleep)
      somnambulate (sleepwalk)
      somnolent (sleepy)

 Root: Tac/Tic ______________________________________
Definition: be silent
SAT Words:
      reticent (reluctant to speak)
      tacit (unspoken)
      taciturn (uncommuicative)

 Root: Troph ______________________________________
Definition: feed, grow
SAT Words:
      autotroph (an organism that makes its own food)
      heterotroph (an organism that obtains its food from sources outside
      of itself)

 Root: Ultim ______________________________________
Definition: last
SAT Words:
      penultimate (second to last)
      ultimate (last)
      ultimatum (a final demand)

 Root: Vener ______________________________________
Definition: respectful
SAT Words:
      venerable (worthy of respect)
      venerate (to show respect)
      veneration (great respect)

 Root: Vit ______________________________________
Definition: life
SAT Word:

     vitality (life force, energy)

 Root: Voc ______________________________________
Definition: voice
SAT Words:
      advocate (to voice support)
      invocation (the act of summoning divine help)
      vociferous (loudly and repeatedly expressive)

 Root: Vol ______________________________________
Definition: fly, wish
SAT Words:
      benevolent (wishing kindness)
      volition (using one’s ability to choose)
      voluntary (freely chosen)

250 Words Important to the SAT Reading
Review these frequently found SAT vocabulary words to help you perform
your best on the words-in-context questions and to fully understand the
reading passages.

Abject—Abject is often used to describe negative things and heighten the
negativity. You might see loneliness, poverty, or sadness described as being
abject. It describes the highest level of loneliness, poverty, or sadness a
person could reach.
Example sentence: Having lost his wife to the bubonic plague, the young
man fell into abject sadness that did not lift until life provided him with a
new companion some 25 years later.
Abode—Put simply, an abode is a place where people live. It could be
anything from a house, to a cave, to an apartment, to a van. If humans take
shelter there, it can be called an abode.
Example sentence: “Welcome to my humble abode,” said the nomad, as he
lifted a flap to allow me entrance to his colorfully furnished canvas home.
Abstract—When something is abstract, it isn’t concrete or tangible. It
might exist as an idea only (the concept of gravity is abstract), or it might
be something that you can touch but that represents ideas or feelings (like
abstract art, which is art that does not depict real items).
Example sentence: She soon realized that while they often had long talks
about the future, they were not concrete discussions. Rather, he discussed
the future abstractly, as something he couldn’t really see.
Acknowledge—To acknowledge someone or something is to notice it and
make sure it knows that it has been noticed. If a student raises her hand
during a lecture, a teacher may nod toward the student to acknowledge the
student. That is, the head nod says, “I see you have your hand raised. Just a
moment while I finish up my thought.”
Example sentence: After training longer and harder than any of his
teammates, the new tennis player was proud to receive the “most improved”
award as an acknowledgement of all his hard work.
Adapt—To adapt is to change to fit the situation. If a fish is switched to a
new tank, it may need a few days to adapt before going back to its more
normal patterns of existence.
Example sentence: The sudden change of rules was very upsetting for the
mock trial team, but soon they were hard at work adapting their strategy in
order to best take advantage of the new situation.
Admonition—An admonition is the noun form of the word admonish.
Therefore, an admonition is the scolding you might receive if you have
done something wrong.
Example sentence: Having been caught with her hand in the cookie jar, the
little girl hung her head and waited for the admonition she was sure she
would receive from her parent.
Affluent—To be affluent is to be very well off financially.
Example sentence: Having grown up in an affluent home, John Smith was
well accustomed to all the luxuries and sophistication of upper-class life.
Agitate—To agitate means to work up or disturb. The big post that is
sometimes in the middle of a clothes washing machine is called an agitator
because it helps work the soap into a lather. You might also agitate a human
or animal by annoying them or frustrating them until they become all
worked up.
Example sentence: As the baby’s cries grew louder and louder, the other
theatergoers became more and more agitated until someone was finally so
fed up that he asked the parents to take the baby outside.
Aggrandize—If you notice the word grand in aggrandize, it may help you
remember how this word is used. Generally, to aggrandize something is to
make it grander; oftentimes people mentally aggrandize and think of things
as grander than they really are.
Example sentence: Since they lived in different states, the young couple had
spent a lot of time apart. When they finally saw each other again, they
realized that they had each aggrandized the other, and were disappointed in
the real person in front of them.
Aggregate—When discussing the aggregate (as a noun), you’re talking
about the whole, not the parts.
Aggregate can also be a verb in which you build up the parts to create a
whole.
Example sentence: I’ve been very busy at work since my superior asked
that I aggregate all the available data on consumer habits and present it as a
complete report to the CEO.
Alternation—Alternating is simply taking turns. For example, you and
your sibling might alternate doing the dishes so that no one has to do them
two nights in a row. Alternation, then, is simply the noun form of the verb
alternate.
Example sentence: The alternation of quarterbacks from one play to the
next confused the opposing team and caused them to misread several plays,
leading to our team scoring a touchdown.
Amicable—To be amicable with other people means to get along with
them. It is a warm word often used to describe friendly, but not overly
friendly, relationships with coworkers, neighbors, and other acquaintances.
Example sentence: After the hubbub from the move settled down, the
roommates forged an amicable relationship. While never becoming close
friends, they were more than happy to bring in the other’s mail and to live
in relative peace and harmony.
Analogous—When two things are analogous to each other, they can be
compared to one another. Often, this comparison will help clarify
something about one of the things being compared. Think of the word
analogy when thinking about what analogous means.
Example sentence: Finding my missing phone was analogous to trying to
find a needle in a haystack—it was pretty hopeless.
Analogy—An analogy is a comparison between two items using like or as.
Example analogy: The young boy’s jealousy grew inside him like a little
green monster, waiting to escape.
Anomaly—An anomaly is something strange or out of the usual pattern of
things. If, for example, a very kind and sweet classmate lost their temper
just one time, you might call that occurrence an anomaly.
Example sentence: The scientist assured the worried townspeople that the
strange lights at night were merely a meteorological anomaly and not the
signals of arriving aliens.
Antipathy—If you were to hate someone’s guts, you might say you felt
antipathy toward them. It is a very negative feeling toward another person
or thing.
Example sentence: While he loved his wife very much, he felt nothing but
antipathy toward his in-laws, which put a definite strain on their marriage.
Apparition—Apparition sounds like the word appear. An apparition is
something that suddenly appears. Oftentimes, ghosts and other supernatural
phenomena will be described as being apparitions.
Example sentence: The youth quaked as they heard a strange sound; they
should have never broken into the abandoned house, which was full of
apparitions.
Arbitrary—This word can usually be replaced with the word random.
Example sentence: The seating chart had previously been arbitrary, but the
teacher had to be more deliberate in assigning seats during the second
quarter so as to prevent cheating.
Ascertain—To ascertain something is to find it out or confirm it. For
example, the police may hold a person for a certain amount of time while
they try to ascertain the details of the crime committed.
Example sentence: The town waited with bated breath as the counters
worked to ascertain the winner of the mayoral election.
Aspire—If someone were to tell you to “aspire to higher things,” it might
be interpreted as “dream big.” Aspiring means working toward a lofty goal.
Example sentence: Though I’m only a yellow belt at the moment, I aspire to
be a black belt in a few years.
Autocratic—An autocrat is someone in charge who has all the power. The
czars in Russia, for example, were autocrats. There was no governmental
power outside of them. Autocratic, then, is the adjectival form of autocrat—
it can be used to describe someone who is acting like an autocrat.
Example sentence: Mrs. Nafziger is a very strict teacher and is quite
autocratic in the way she runs her history classes.
Automated—Think about the word automatic. Automated means
something has been changed to make it now automatic where as previously
it was not. For example, a dishwasher would automate the dishwashing
process.
Example sentence: The factory workers were very concerned about losing
their jobs as more and more tasks around the plant were automated.
Beget—When you beget something, it means you take steps to bring that
thing into existence. It can also refer to an action that leads to something.
You might say that if you pass around a petition to bring chicken nuggets
back to the cafeteria, you are trying to beget change. (Don’t mess this word
up with the similar-sounding word baguette, which is a long, thin loaf of
French bread).
Example sentence: Planting seeds in the spring is the only way to beget a
harvest in the fall.
Benevolent—To be benevolent is to be kind. Quite often, this word is used
to describe elderly people who are willing to give away all they have and
charities that work to better people’s lives by giving.
Example sentence: When hard times hit the community, many people
turned to the benevolent philanthropist who live just outside of town. It was
well known that he would help everyone he could.
Bestow—To bestow something is to give it to someone. This is often use
when giving titles and other honors.
Example sentence: After his heroic actions on the battlefield left him with
grave injuries, the government bestowed upon the soldier the Purple Heart
medal.
25
Biological—Biology is the study of life; biological is describing something
related to the study of life or related to life itself. For example, if you are
infected with bacteria, you could call how your body reacts a biological
response.
Example sentence: When I broke my leg, my doctor explained the
biological process my body would go through to bring about healing; it was
really neat to learn!
Calibrate—To calibrate something is to adjust it so that it runs the way it
should. This is especially applicable to machines that have readouts. If your
car’s speedometer tells you that you’re going 30 miles per hour when
you’re really going 55 miles per hour, then you need to have your
speedometer calibrated.
Example sentence: The old oven was in bad shape. When we set it to 350, it
only reached 200. We called a repair person to calibrate the dial, and that
fixed the problem.
Calisthenics—Calisthenics are a type of exercise that rely on body weight.
They include push-ups, sit-ups, jumping jacks, and other simple movements
that require no equipment.
Example sentence: While the elderly man was far past the point in life
where he could lift heavy weights, he still stuck to the daily calisthenics
routine that he had in the Army some 50 years earlier.
Capacity—The capacity of something is a measure of its ability. A room
has a maximum capacity, which says how many people can be in that room.
A car may have the capacity to go 150 miles per hour. A person could have
the capacity to handle a difficult situation.
Example sentence: What the president was asking the man to do was far
beyond his capacity; he would need to request backup.
Celestial—When something is celestial, it has to do with outer space.
Example sentence: When studying astronomy, it is helpful to have a
celestial map for reference.
Censure—To censure someone is to give them a formal reprimand. Quite
often, governments hand out censures to their members for having done
something wrong, but not necessarily illegal.
Example sentence: The young representative received a censure after his
foolish and dangerous antics were published by a respectable newspaper.
Circulation—Circulation is quite often thought of in relation to blood
moving through the body, but it can refer to anything moving back and
forth or around in a predictable pattern.
Example sentence: The circulation of rumors can be quite detrimental to a
person’s reputation.
Coerce—To coerce someone is to get them to do something by threat of
force.
Example sentence: When asking nicely fails to work, bad people often turn
to coercion to get what they want.
Cognition—Cognition is the ability to understand something. When people
get older and develop dementia, quite often their cognition is negatively
impacted.
Example sentence: Getting plenty of sleep is instrumental in increasing
one’s cognition.
Colloquial—The word colloquial almost always describes language.
Colloquial language is everyday language. In English, for example, you
probably use a lot of colloquial language with your friends, but likely speak
a bit more properly to teachers and other adults.
Example sentence: When my turn came to speak to the foreign dignitary, I
did my best to speak formally and avoid using colloquial language.
Commercial—Commercial has to do with the buying and selling of goods.
For example, if you begin a commercial enterprise, you are likely setting
out to go into business to buy, sell, create, or distribute goods.
Example sentence: Many companies now use overnight delivery to get their
commercial goods to the customers who have ordered them.
Complementary—When something is complementary, it goes well with
the thing around it.
Example sentence: Milk and cookies are complementary foods that I greatly
enjoy eating simultaneously.
Complimentary—Something that is provided free of charge. Also, a
compliment is a nice thing to say about someone.
Example sentence: Compliments about your excellent work cost the teacher
nothing—they are complimentary.
Conflate—Oftentimes, we are warned not to conflate things. This means
we need to keep the two things separate and not assume that they are the
same idea. For example, in history class you may conflate the feminist
movement and the suffragette movement. While they have some
similarities, they aren’t the same thing.
Example sentence: Be careful not to conflate infatuation and love. That is a
surefire way to end up with a broken heart.
Conjure—To conjure is to bring something up. When telling a scary story,
you may conjure up images that are terrifying to the listeners.
Example sentence: If a small child demands candy when you have none,
you might reply, “I’m afraid I can’t conjure up sweets out of thin air just
because you want them.”
Consensus—When everyone agrees, there is a consensus.
Example sentence: In government, rarely is there a consensus. Rather, there
are a multitude of opinions vying to be heard.
Consequence—Consequences are the results of an action taken. There can
be positive consequences, but more often this word is used to indicate a
negative result or a punishment for negative actions.
Example sentence: If you fail to show up at practice, the consequence is
that you don’t get to play.
Conservator—A conservator is a person whose job it is to conserve or
preserve something. This word could also be used to just mean a general
guardian.
Example sentence: The art collection had a marvelous conservator who did
all she could to ensure that the art would be enjoyed for many generations
to come.
Constitution—We are likely all familiar with the governmental term
constitution. But this word can also apply to someone’s bodily health or
how something is put together. Any of those three meanings could pop up
on the SAT.
Example sentences: Since the constitution of the carriage was not very
sturdy, a delegate was involved in an accident on his way to the
Constitutional Convention. Luckily, the delegate had a strong personal
constitution, and he recovered easily in just a few days.
Contingent—When something is contingent, it is relying on other factors
to come to be. An outdoor field trip, for example, might be contingent on
the weather.
Example sentence: I am planning on traveling to the capital to watch the
soccer team play for the state title. That is contingent, of course, on us
winning this last playoff game.
Conventional—When something is conventional, it follows the traditional
rules that are set up. For example, a bride wearing white is very
conventional while a bride wearing bright red would be unconventional.
Example sentence: My family tends to be very conventional at
Thanksgiving. We always eat a turkey with stuffing, mashed potatoes, and a
few side dishes, and then we have pumpkin pie for dessert.
Convey—To convey something is to get it across. You could convey a tin
of cookies safely from your grandmother to your mother. If you are an
effective public speaker, you can convey ideas from your mind to the minds
of others.
Example sentence: Try as he might, the student teacher continually failed to
convey his expectations to the class. This resulted in a rather disorderly
classroom experience.
Convoke—Generally, the word convoke means to call a meeting.
Example sentence: Convoke the leaders of the nations; we must come
together or we shall surely perish.
Convulsion—To convulse is a physical movement. Think of a person
having a seizure—all of their muscles are convulsing. They are therefore
having convulsions.
Example sentence: The audience stared in amazement as the snake
charmer’s snake exited the basket, its body racked with convulsions as it
heard the mesmerizing music.
Cooperatively—You likely know the word cooperate. Cooperatively just
means working in a cooperative manner.
Example sentence: During times of international crisis, it is best for
governments to work cooperatively with one another.
50
Cultivate—To cultivate something is to bring it up or to try to make it grow
or exist. Farmers cultivate crops. Your teachers try to cultivate in you a love
of learning.
Example sentence: Holidays like the 4th of July, Labor Day, and Memorial
Day all have a side effect of cultivating a sense of patriotism in the
population.
Dawdle—To dawdle is to lag behind.
Example sentence: “Don’t dawdle or you’ll miss the school bus,” the
grandfather called, as he turned around to see what was taking his
grandchild so long.
Decipher—To decipher something is to figure it out. A spy might decipher
a special code, for instance.
Example sentence: The store clerk looked puzzled as he tried to decipher
why the customer in front of him was so upset.
Deficient—When something is deficient, it isn’t enough; it is lacking
something. In the winter, people are often vitamin D deficient due to
spending too much time indoors.
Example sentence: The young man, while highly educated, had no work
ethic. Due to this deficiency, he was nearly unemployable.
Degrade—To degrade is to break something down slowly over time.
Example sentence: While the engine was still sound, the body of the car had
degraded to the point where it was no longer safe to drive.
Demur—To demur is to politely say no to something or avoid it.
Example sentence: When offered a second helping of food, the man politely
demurred since he already felt full.
Desolation—Desolation is total abandonment, emptiness, and destruction.
Desolation occurs when everything of value and everything alive is
destroyed.
Example sentence: War seemed more imminent each day, and families
quickly began fleeing the city, worried at what seemed to be the certain
desolation to come.
Despoil—Despoil is related to the phrase the spoils of war. The spoils of
war are the things that invaders would take from the inhabitants upon
victory. Pretty much anything of worth would be looted or plundered. To
despoil is the act of taking away anything of value.
Example sentence: The greedy criminals broke into the historic mansion to
despoil it.
Deter—To deter someone is to stop them from doing something.
Example sentence: The would-be bank robbers were deterred when they
saw that security had been increased dramatically.
Disenfranchise—To disenfranchise is to take away someone’s right to vote,
or prevent them from using it.
Example sentence: For most of human history, women were
disenfranchised.
Disparity—A disparity is an inequality or a difference between two things.
For instance, there may be a disparity between the posted rules in a
classroom and the rules that are actually enforced.
Example sentence: Small children are quick to point out any disparity
between the dessert they receive and the dessert their brother or sister
receives.
Disseminate—To disseminate is to pass out or to ensure the spread of
something (quite often information).
Example sentence: At the end of the security meeting, the participants were
asked not to disseminate the knowledge that they had acquired, since doing
so could put people in harm’s way.
Dissimilar—Things that are dissimilar are not the same (not similar).
Example sentence: While they had grown up in the same house, at the same
time, with the same parents, the twins were quite dissimilar.
Diverge—When two things move apart, they diverge. (This is the opposite
of when two things come together, which is when they converge.)
Example sentence: Quite often, when students graduate, they diverge from
their friends and move on with life.
Doctrine—A doctrine is a sincerely held belief, often of the religious
variety, but also political or other beliefs as well.
Example sentence: Some people do not stand for the pledge as it goes
against their religious doctrine—this is their right under the First
Amendment.
Doldrums—The word doldrums is often used to describe a time in which
nothing happens. It is also used in sailing to describe an area of water that is
not moving in which a sail boat would be trapped. Doldrums are never a
good thing and can sometimes even be used to describe depression,
boredom, and other negative mental states.
Example sentence: After his breakup, he entered a period of doldrums
which lasted for several weeks.
Domestic—When something is described as domestic, it is related to the
home. If someone hires domestic help, they are likely hiring someone to
help take care of their house or something in it. It could be a gardener,
maid, or cook.
Example sentence: Compared to the other families of 1900, their marriage
was unconventional, with her working and bringing home a paycheck while
he stayed home and attended to domestic matters.
Dominion—Dominion is control or authority over someone or something.
Example sentence: The king frequently exercised his dominion over the
serfs to extract more and more work from them in less and less time.
Dubious—To be dubious is to be doubtful and uncertain.
Example sentence: While my friend was eager to explore the cave, I was
much more dubious about doing so.
Earnest—When someone is earnest, they are showing that they are serious.
They really believe what they are saying and they find it important that you
understand that.
Example sentence: The young man spoke earnestly as he told her of his
feelings and tried to convince her to accept his proposal.
Eddy—An eddy is when water or air moves swiftly in a circular motion.
Example sentence: The boat, caught in a persistent eddy, appeared to be lost
forever.
Effectual—The word effectual means that the desired result has been
achieved through that action.
Example sentence: I have found that asking for help is far more effectual
than simply waiting for someone to offer.
Efficacy—The efficacy of something is how effective that thing is.
Example sentence: The efficacy of the treatment came into question when
the wound became infected instead of healing.
Efficient—When something is efficient, it is done in the most direct way
possible using the least amount of time and resources to get the best result.
Example sentence: Jennifer completed her errands quite efficiently and was
back at home just an hour after she had left.
Embellish—To embellish is to add details or flair to something—either
verbally or physically.
Example sentence: The seamstress told embellished tales of her youth while
embellishing the wedding dress with thousands of tiny pearl beads.
75
Emit—Emit means to give off.
Example sentence: After having been sprayed by a skunk, the puppy
emitted a horrid smell for several days to come.
Empathize—When you empathize with someone, you feel what they’re
feeling. You might empathize with a friend who had a terrible grade on a
test, or with a family who needs some help getting enough food for a
holiday meal.
Example sentence: The storm damage to the home caused an outpouring of
support from their neighbors, who empathized with the now-struggling
family.
Endearing—When people are endearing, they create warm feelings toward
themselves. A person may have an endearing smile that makes you like
them and feel kindly toward them.
Example sentence: When I joined my new school, I was seated next to a
small girl with pigtails. She had the most endearing personality and we
were soon great friends.
Endeavor—To endeavor is to try something. It can also be used as a noun,
meaning “a try.”
Example sentence: Once the rain stops, we will endeavor to get the garden
planted.
Endow—To endow is to give. Quite often, this term is used to describe
massive donations given to charities upon the death of a wealthy person. It
can also talk about rights given to people just because of their birth or
citizenship.
Example sentence: (From the Declaration of Independence) “We hold these
truths to be self-evident, that all men are created equal, that they are
endowed by their creator with certain unalienable rights, that among these
are life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness.”
Enhance—To enhance something is to make it better or clearer. An
umbrella enhances your experience of walking in the rain. Prescription
glasses enhance your eyesight.
Example sentence: The coach added a few trick plays to the book in order
to enhance our chances of success.
Enterprise—When you set out to do something, the process of doing it is
an enterprise. This word often refers to big or difficult tasks. Think about
the starship Enterprise from Star Trek—it has a very difficult mission: “To
explore strange new worlds. To seek out new life and new civilizations. To
boldly go where no man has gone before.”
Example sentence: The process of building and moving to a whole new
school in just a year was quite a difficult enterprise; however, the school
board was committed to it as it was seen as the best option for the students’
education.
Entice—To entice someone is to convince them to do something through
the promise of reward (as opposed to coerce, which is through promise of
harm). A cat can be enticed to come out from under the bed with a treat.
Example sentence: When the workers dragged their feet getting a project
done, the manager enticed them to finish by promising an extra vacation
day to whomever completed their portion first.
Entrenched—To be entrenched means to be dug in, to refuse to move,
especially when it comes to thoughts and ideas. Think about how armies
use trenches. They dig trenches, and then they can’t easily move from the
trenches without risking harm. The word entrenched comes from that idea.
Example sentence: Some people believe that debates are essentially useless
since both parties often begin the debate already so entrenched in their ideas
that they won’t even listen to the other debater.
Ephemeral—Something ephemeral is very short-lived. It is fleeting and
quickly gone.
Example sentence: The rainbow—one of the most beautiful natural
phenomena—is quite ephemeral and generally disappears within just a few
short minutes.
Evince—Evince is generally a verb meaning to show one’s feelings.
Example sentence: The actions of the government as it tries and fails to help
time and again evince anger and frustration.
Expenditure—An expenditure is a spending of money or other resources.
Example sentence: Buying all new china was an extravagant expenditure,
but the noble felt it was necessary since he would be entertaining a duchess.
Explanatory—When something is explanatory, it explains something.
Example sentence: Quite often, students skip over explanatory examples
and jump straight to the work; this is generally a mistake.
Extensive—When something is extensive, it is widespread or far-reaching.
You might also say it is thorough.
Example sentence: Due to extensive cheating, the teacher shredded the tests
and instead made each student meet with her for an oral examination of
their knowledge.
Feature—A feature is a part of an item that is designed for a specific use.
One feature of my car, for example, is a stereo system.
Example sentence: I was excited to check out all of the new features on my
phone upgrade.
Feeble—To be feeble is to be weak.
Example sentence: The feeble elderly couple often needed their neighbors’
help with the landscaping.
Fetter—To fetter is to hold someone or something back from what they
want to do or accomplish.
Example sentence: While I love my parents, living under their rules often
leaves me feeling fettered.
Finite—Finite is the opposite of infinite. When something is finite, it has a
definitive beginning and ending.
Example sentence: The fact that the movie was finite saddened me—I
wished it could go on and on forever.
Fiscal—When people describe things as fiscal (like the fiscal year), they
are talking about money and the economy.
Example sentence: Because of excessive spending, the business was
experiencing fiscal difficulties that threatened to bankrupt it.
Florid—Generally describing a person’s face, this adjective means red or
flushed.
Example sentence: Having run the 5K in brutal heat, the athlete rested with
his florid face cradled in his hands.
Former—Former refers to the one before or in the past. The former
president used to be the president, for example. If I give you two options
and you choose the former, then you have chosen the first one that was
given.
Example sentence: I was shocked when the former mayor of my town was
revealed to be in the middle of a scandal, which plunged the town into a
fiscal crisis.
Forum—A forum is a location or a meeting where people can talk about
their thoughts, ideas, and opinions.
Example sentence: The teacher rearranged the desks into a circle to
facilitate discussion and turn the classroom into a forum on governmental
improvements.
Frantic—Frantic could also be expressed as desperate. When you are
frantic about something, there is urgency to do all you can as you try to
solve the problem.
Example sentence: The dog wandered off during the picnic, triggering a
frantic search by all the family members.
Frequent—Frequent simply means often. When something happens
frequently, it happens all the time.
Example sentence: His frequent tardiness led to a Saturday detention.
Fundamental—Fundamentals are basics. The fundamentals of reading
would be learning the alphabet and phonics. The fundamentals of baseball
are throwing, catching, and hitting.
Example sentence: After many in the class failed the math test because they
weren’t allowed to use calculators, the teacher made them return to
fundamentals and practice adding, subtracting, multiplying, and dividing by
hand.
100
Germinate—To germinate something is to take something with potential
and make it start to grow. Quite often this term is used with seeds.
Example sentence: Part of the preschool’s mission statement is “to
germinate active and curious minds.”
Glom—To glom is to attach to something (often in a blob-like manner).
Example sentence: Even despite continual cleaning, the boat was still
covered in barnacles, which had glommed on to the hull.
Glut—A glut is a ridiculous abundance of something. It’s having so much
of something you don’t even know what to do with it.
Example sentence: When the flood waters receded, there was a glut of carp
left behind, flopping on the streets. The townspeople ate like kings that
night and celebrated the day every year after with a Carp Festival.
Grievance—A grievance is a complaint. Think of it as something you
would grieve over—something that makes you sad.
Example sentence: After the salesperson was seen taking a picture of my
credit card, I felt it necessary to lodge a grievance against him as he was
probably planning on stealing my identity.
Haggle—Haggling is the process two people go through as they exchange
offers back and forth while trying to make a deal.
Example sentence: One reason I like garage sales so much is the
opportunity to haggle with the seller and try to secure a better deal.
Ignominious—Something that is ignominious is undignified—it will likely
cause the person experiencing it to feel shame or embarrassment.
Example sentence: My brother pulled the chair out from under me, causing
me to sprawl on the ground in a very ignominious position.
Illegible—When something is illegible, it is unable to be read or
understood.
Example sentence: With the prevalence of typing these days, many people
have illegible handwriting due to lack of practice.
Immured—When someone is immured, they are held against their will in
some way, often enclosed.
Example sentence: The young man felt trapped in the relationship, immured
by his desire not to hurt her feelings.
Impel—To impel is to push or force someone to do something in some way.
Example sentence: Impelled by the fear of loneliness, many people resort to
blind dates to try to find a companion.
Inapplicable—When something doesn’t apply in a given situation, it is
inapplicable. For example, you may have the quadratic equation
memorized, which is great; however, that equation is inapplicable to many
non-quadratic math problems.
Example sentence: While she had many skills, most of them were
inapplicable to the current crisis; she would have to call for help.
Incomprehensible—Something that is incomprehensible is unable to be
comprehended or understood.
Example sentence: The student’s illegible handwriting and
incomprehensible train of thought resulted in a very low grade on the essay.
Incontestable—Incontestable means unable to be contested. In other
words, you can’t dispute it or go against it.
Example sentence: The results of the election were incontestable; the
candidate won by a landslide.
Incorporate—To incorporate is to fully include something. For example,
you might incorporate an explanation of climate change into a paper on
Antarctica.
Example sentence: The leader was harshly criticized when the press found
out that he had failed to incorporate any women into the task force on
family and children’s rights.
Incredulous—When you’re incredulous of something, you don’t really
believe it, or you have doubts about it.
Example sentence: The child looked at her friend incredulously when she
tried to convince her that the monster was, in fact, not real.
Indifference—Indifference is that feeling of not feeling strongly about
something one way or the other. You might feel indifference toward which
teacher you get, or what you have for lunch, or any number of things.
Example sentence: Indifference is a dangerous emotion as it can lead to
people drifting through life and never taking any risks or making any big
decisions.
Indistinguishable—When two things are indistinguishable, they can’t be
told apart from one another: There are no distinguishing features.
Example sentence: Even though their mother could tell them apart, to
everyone else the twins were indistinguishable.
Ineffective—When something is ineffective, it doesn’t work. It doesn’t
have the effect it should.
Example sentence: Flushing ice cubes down the toilet is an ineffective
strategy that kids try to ensure a snow day the next morning.
Inefficacious—This is pretty much the same as the previous word.
Inefficacious just means not having the desired effect.
Example sentence: Studying can be inefficacious if you don’t make sure to
get rid of all distractions before beginning.
Inexorable—Inexorable is kind of like inevitable. It can’t be avoided or
stopped—it will occur no matter what.
Example sentence: The clock had been ticking constantly for the entire
winter, counting out the inexorable passage of time.
Ingenious—For some reason, ingenious and genius mean the same thing.
Example sentence: The pirate queen was known for her ingenious plots to
capture other ships.
Innumerable—When something is innumerable, it is unable to be counted.
You’ll notice num hidden away—this is also the root of the word number.
Example sentence: The grains of sand on the beach are truly innumerable.
Institution—An institution is an organization that has been created to fulfill
a purpose (generally for the greater good). For example, governments,
churches, and schools can all be examples of institutions. Generally,
institutions are thought of as permanent or nearly impossible to get rid of.
Example sentence: Between churches, schools, and my mom’s job as our
small-town mayor, I often feel like I grew up in institutions.
Insurrection—An insurrection is a revolt or an uprising.
Example sentence: Though Catherine the Great is revered by Russians, the
peasant insurrection during her time as ruler put a damper on her legacy.
Integrate—To integrate two or more things is to mix them together.
Example sentence: I don’t remember the exact date, but at some point in
seventh grade, the girls’ lunch tables and the boys’ lunch tables started to
integrate and nothing was ever the same again.
Intend—Intend has to do with intentions. It’s what you mean to do, not
what you actually do. Every new year, many people intend to form new
habits; what actually happens is a different story.
Example sentence: In the evenings, I always intend to get up early the next
morning to increase my productivity. This rarely actually happens.
125
Intermittent—Intermittent just means off and on at a set interval.
Example sentence: The stoplight let cars proceed intermittently.
Intuitive—When something is intuitive, it is easy to use and figure out
without directions. You can go based on your gut feeling and probably get it
right.
Example sentence: While some people struggle to memorize math facts,
other people find numbers to be intuitive and breeze through their classes.
Inherent—When something is inherent, it wasn’t learned or created; it is
naturally occurring. For example, some animals have an inherent fear of
predators. You may have an inherent love of the color green or hatred of the
smell of tomatoes.
Example sentence: As hard as they tried, my neighbors could not train their
dog out of his inherent desire to dig holes.
Insolent—You might well get in trouble for acting insolent at school. Such
behavior shows a general bad attitude, lack of respect, and overall
grumpiness.
Example sentence: “Wouldn’t you like to know,” came the insolent reply
from the teen when her father asked her why she had returned so late the
night before.
Intolerable—When something is intolerable, you simply can’t put up with
(or tolerate) it.
Example sentence: “Your behavior is intolerable,” her father responded
before he grounded her.
Invasive—Think of the word invade. When something is invasive, it
invades something or goes somewhere it isn’t wanted.
Example sentence: Family get-togethers are always difficult since my great
aunt likes to gossip; she goes around asking everyone highly invasive
questions.
Inversion—To invert something is to turn it upside down. An inversion is
the noun form of that word and means the act of turning upside down.
Example sentence: The scariest roller coaster in the park had the fastest
speeds, the highest hills, and the most inversions.
Irk—When something irks you, it annoys you, but not in a major way.
Someone leaving a dirty dish out, taking the middle piece of cake, not using
their turn signal in traffic, or failing to do what they promised may irk you.
Example sentence: I was very irked when the teacher changed the
assignment. While there was still plenty of time before the due date, I had
already begun the research and had to change course due to the adjustments.
Labyrinth—Quite simply, a labyrinth is a maze.
Example sentence: Moving from a small family firm to a giant corporation
was a big change, and I often found myself lost in the labyrinth of cubicles.
Laden—To be laden is to be weighed down with something physically. A
shopping cart might be laden with groceries, for instance.
Example sentence: The mailman dreaded the holiday season when his bag
became quite cumbersome to carry, laden as it was with packages full of
presents.
Latter—Latter is the opposite of former. Former is the first thing
mentioned, latter is the second or last.
Example sentence: I was given the option of either getting out of bed for
school or getting grounded, and I foolishly choose the latter, which left me
trapped at home over homecoming weekend.
Liaison—This is often used to mean a close connection or relationship. It
can also mean a person who facilitates understanding between parties.
Example sentence: In the office, it was often my job to be a liaison between
various parties.
Magnitude—The magnitude of something is how big it is.
Example sentence: My coworker seemed to have her head buried in the
sand and didn’t realize the magnitude of losing our biggest client.
Malice—Malice (mal at the beginning of the word means bad) is generally
used to describe the feeling of one person wishing to do something harmful
to another person.
Example sentence: It was a long-standing rivalry, and the malice off the
field lead to overly aggressive behavior on the field, which resulted in the
game being ended at halftime.
Malign—To malign someone is to say terrible things about them.
Example sentence: After he got a bad grade, he proceeded to malign the
teacher to anyone who would listen.
Manifest—This can mean a variety of things. As a noun, it is a complete
list. As a verb, it means to make appear or to make clear. As an adjective, it
means obvious or clear.
Example sentence: The passenger manifest manifested to the detective the
fact that the sought-after party was not on board the ship.
Manipulate—To manipulate something or someone is to change them to
your liking. You might manipulate your parent’s opinion on where to eat by
casually mentioning pizza several times during the day. You might also
manipulate clay into the shape of a vase.
Example sentence: While many people believe that data don’t lie, in reality,
data can be heavily manipulated to show just about whatever results are
desired.
Mantra—A mantra is something that people repeat over and over to
themselves in the hopes that it becomes true or as a means toward achieving
a goal.
Example sentence: In the early days of January, people who appear to be
just going about life are silently repeating their mantras in the hopes of
fulfilling their New Years’ resolutions.
Marginalize—This word refers to the action of making something less,
often when it shouldn’t be. A person’s feelings may be marginalized or
brushed away as not important.
Example sentence: The young girl always felt marginalized when her
successful older siblings were around.
Meander—To meander is to wander in a non-straight line and with little or
no haste or purpose.
Example sentence: If I get bored this afternoon, I may meander over to the
park to see if anything is going on.
Mechanization—Mechanization is when something that used to be done by
hand is now done by a machine.
Example sentence: Mechanization has caused great concern in the auto
industry lately as workers have been laid off and their jobs replaced by
robots.
Meddle—To meddle is to tamper with something, often human situations
or emotions.
Example sentence: When my two best friends broke up, I tried to help them
fix their relationship, but I only ended up making it worse. As my mom
often says, “Meddling does no one any good.”
Metastasize—When something metastasizes, it is spreading.
Example sentence: Luckily, the disease had been found before it
metastasized, and so it appeared as if recovery were very likely.
Mire—To mire is to stick something down. When someone or something is
mired, it can’t be freed, but is stuck in a sticky situation either figuratively
or literally.
Example sentence: I always cry during my favorite childhood book when
the horse becomes mired in a bog and must be abandoned so that the quest
can be completed.
Monotony—Monotony is the same thing over and over again.
Example sentence: As the semester progressed, I felt trapped in a scholastic
monotony with nothing ever changing, each day exactly the same as the
last.
150
Motivation—Motivation is what drives you. It’s the feeling inside that
makes you start that project, run that extra mile, or take the extra shift.
Example sentence: Since motivation was low, the teacher promised extra
credit to the first student who turned in an “A”-worthy project.
Mundane—Something that is mundane is boring and normal. It’s a regular
everyday occurrence.
Example sentence: Until the fire alarms went off, it had just been a
mundane Monday morning.
Mutable—Think about the math term permutation. A permutation has to do
with all the different ways a set of numbers can be changed and rearranged
into different orders. That root word mut generally has to do with change.
Mutable describes something that is easy to or likely to change. Other
words you might know with this root include mutate and commute.
Example sentence: The speaker was worried he would be unable to change
the audience’s minds, but it turned out they were much more mutable than
he had anticipated.
Mystify—To mystify just means to confuse. Think about the word mystery
with the same root. A mystery is confusing—mystifying someone confuses
them.
Example sentence: The scientists were mystified at first as to the meaning
of the data that they had collected.
Net—In describing pay, net pay is what is left after all taxes and fees are
removed. In scientific terms, it could be what is left after all other
considerations are removed. For example, when you weigh something and
you remove the weight of the container, you are left with the net weight of
what is in the container.
Example sentence: The charity race raised a net total of $3,500 after the
administrative expenses and permit fees were paid out.
Notation—You know the word note; what you probably didn’t realize is
that it’s a shortened version of notation. It’s something you write to help
you remember something or to convey information to another person.
Example sentence: By the time I bought the textbook, it had already had
several other owners and the margins were filled with notations—some
helpful, others decidedly not.
Nuance—A nuance is a subtle difference in the meaning or expression of
something.
Example sentence: While the applicants responded to the question in a
similar way, the nuances in their reactions helped the manager make a
decision as to who would be a better fit for the job.
Null—Null means nothing; it’s just another way of saying zero.
Example sentence: When the parties pass away, the contract becomes null
and void.
Obliterate—To obliterate something is to completely and utterly destroy it
beyond recognition.
Example sentence: The meteor obliterated the forest into which it crashed,
scattering debris all over the countryside.
Obstinate—Obstinate is just the same as stubborn. It means refusing to
give up even when wrong or faced with insurmountable forces against you.
Example sentence: Despite pleading, cajoling, and coercing, the young
child obstinately refused to get in the bathtub.
Oscillate—To oscillate is to move back and forth in a predictable pattern at
a set speed. The pendulum in a grandfather clock is a classic example of
oscillation.
Example sentence: The oscillation of the carnival ride made me sick to my
stomach.
Onerous—When something is onerous it is difficult to do, usually taking a
lot of unpleasant work to complete.
Example sentence: As a veterinarian, I often have the onerous task of
discussing expensive bills with clients.
Panacea—A panacea is a fix-all solution.
Example sentence: While most people view love as a panacea, I know from
experience that it can’t solve all problems.
Parasitic—Something that is parasitic attaches to something else and feeds
off of it without giving anything back. This might be used to describe an
actual parasite (like a tapeworm) or a person like the friend who always
borrows money, but never returns it.
Example sentence: When one person would get wise to her parasitic ways,
she would merely find someone else to leach the homework off of for the
next few weeks.
Parity—Parity is equalness or being equal. It is the opposite of disparity,
which is inequality.
Example sentence: Despite the parent’s best efforts at parity, one of the
children always felt that they had received less attention.
Paradox—A paradox is something that contradicts itself or sets up an
impossible train of thought that never ends but always circles back on itself.
Example sentence: One of the most well-known paradoxes is the statement,
“This statement is false.”
Partake—To partake is the same as to participate. It is often used with food
(to partake in a meal is to eat it) but can also be used with any given
activity.
Example sentence: Even though I always insist I’m not hungry, my
grandmother won’t let me leave her home without partaking in at least one
meal or snack with her and my grandfather.
Paternal—To be paternal is to act in a fatherly way. Paternal can also be
used to describe things relating to fathers.
Example sentence: Even though I barely knew him, the old man acted in
quite a paternal way to me and insisted on seeing me home safely when I
became lost.
Permeate—To permeate is to soak through something, invading and
saturating every part of it and leaving nothing untouched. Water permeates
things in a flood, and smells permeate rooms and homes.
Example sentence: The smell of burned food permeated the kitchen as the
family rushed to save their dinner.
Permutation—Remember the word mutable from above? Permutation has
that same mut syllable indicating it’s about change. Permutation has to do
with all the different ways a set of items can be arranged in different orders.
In how many ways can the order be changed?
Example sentence: In math class, the teacher explained permutations to us
by making ten students line up in as many different ways as possible; the
possibilities seemed endless.
Perpetual—Something that is perpetual is never-ending.
Example sentence: Life in the Arctic Circle is very difficult in the winter
when whole communities are plunged into perpetual darkness for months
on end.
Perspective—Your perspective is how you see things both literally
(different seats in a theater have different perspectives of the stage) and
figuratively (you and your parent may have different perspectives on your
staying up until 3 A.M.).
Example sentence: Since he was the only young person in the office, he was
often called into meetings to give a different perspective on various issues.
Perturb—To perturb is to disturb, but in an emotional way. A scary book
or a strange person may perturb.
Example sentence: The teacher was quite perturbed by the actions of the
small child, which were very out of character for a four-year-old.
Pervading—Pervading or pervade are often used as synonyms for
permeate. Something (especially a smell) can be pervading when it
permeates an area where it is not welcome.
Example sentence: The pervading smell was quite offensive to the students,
who quickly jumped to open the windows.
Phenomena—Phenomena is the plural of the word phenomenon. A
phenomenon is something that is known to exist or occur, the cause of
which is often not clear. Planes going down in the Bermuda triangle is a
well-known phenomenon.
Example sentence: A great crowd gathered to watch the strange
phenomenon.
175
Pittance—A pittance is a pitiably small amount: not really enough to do
anything with.
Example sentence: With her children and husband all gone, the widow
somehow managed to live off the pittance given to her by neighborhood
charities.
Plasticity—The plasticity of something is its ability to change and be
molded.
Example sentence: The best time to learn a foreign language is when you’re
young; that’s when you still have the most brain plasticity.
Plenipotentiary—A plenipotentiary is a person who has been given the
authority to act on behalf of their country in foreign countries. Diplomats
often act in this role, though true plenipotentiary power is rare.
Example sentence: During negotiations with France, Benjamin Franklin
acted as a plenipotentiary for the United States.
Posterity—Posterity is the future of humankind: all of the people who will
come in the future.
Example sentence: The collection of American historical artifacts at the
museum is being carefully preserved for posterity.
Postulate—To postulate is to guess or to present an idea that is not proven.
A TV personality may postulate that a certain person will be elected.
Example sentence: “Maybe there is a traffic jam,” she postulated as she
waited for her date who was very late.
Potent—Potent means very strong. Not physically, but of a high
concentration. A smell or taste, for example, may be very potent.
Example sentence: As the potent fumes wafted through the laboratory, the
alarms sounded to warn all the scientists to evacuate quickly.
Prattle—To prattle is to talk on and on while saying little of value.
Example sentence: Faced with an abundance of awkward silences, the
young lady prattled endlessly to avoid the quiet.
Predecessor—The predecessor to something or someone is what came
before. This word is often used to describe a person who held an office or
job prior to the current office or job holder.
Example sentence: “My predecessor may have allowed talking in class, but
I do not,” the new teacher informed her students.
Preposterous—Something that is preposterous is so ridiculous as to be
laughable.
Example sentence: The elderly man laughed and said “don’t be
preposterous,” when his grandson suggested that he try the mechanical bull
at the fair.
Primitive—Something that is primitive is very basic and not
technologically advanced. For example, some might see flag signaling as a
primitive form of long-distance communication.
Example sentence: Primitive computers took up whole buildings and had
less computing power than the average flip phone does today.
Pristine—Something that is pristine is untouched and perfect. It is
completely unmarred in any way.
Example sentence: One of my favorite sights is a field of pristine snow,
untrampled by any animals or humans.
Proliferate—To proliferate is to grow, spread, and reproduce, often at a
high rate of speed. Rumors tend to proliferate within schools, as do germs.
Example sentence: The weeds proliferated throughout the summer, and he
quickly realized that having a pristine garden was impossible.
Promulgate—To promulgate an idea is to spread it around. There are a lot
of programs, for example, that promulgate anti-bullying messages to
students.
Example sentence: The man was asked to leave the gathering when he was
heard to be promulgating his latest get-rich-quick scheme.
Province—A province is a geographical area under a government. Many
countries have a province system instead of having states.
Example sentence: As a Canadian, I often simply respond with my province
when Americans ask what state I’m from.
Proxy—A proxy is a substitute. A person standing in for another person
can generally be called a proxy. In some situations, formal events like
voting, getting married, and signing contracts can be done by proxy.
Example sentence: Since the CEO was incredibly busy that day, he had his
assistant attend the board meeting to vote as his proxy.
Psychological—Things that are psychological have to do with the inner
workings of our minds, which affect our feelings, emotions, and actions.
Example sentence: The doctor, having run out of tests to perform, came to
the conclusion that the symptoms must have psychological causes.
Quarrel—To quarrel is to argue with someone. A quarrel is an argument.
Example sentence: The young nanny was constantly begging the children
not to quarrel.
Rapacious—Someone who is rapacious is unable to be satisfied. They are
very greedy and always looking to gain more of what they want.
Example sentence: The rapacious vultures searched for food all over the
meadow.
Receptive—A person who is receptive is open to receiving things, quite
often ideas.
Example sentence: While the student was nervous about asking to take the
test again, the teacher was quite receptive to the idea.
Redress—Don’t get tricked into thinking this word means to get dressed
again. Instead, it means to fix or make a situation right where someone has
been wronged.
Example sentence: The man who had been wrongfully imprisoned sought
redress for his grievances.
Reluctant—To be reluctant is to act on the feeling of not wanting to do
something. If you end up doing the thing, you do it in a manner that shows
that you don’t want to be doing it.
Example sentence: The teacher was reluctant to give up his Saturday to
grade papers, but the students had already waited a week, so he sat down
with his red pen and got started.
Remonstrate—To remonstrate is to object to something strongly or to
speak out against something strongly.
Example sentence: The principal remonstrated the student’s misbehavior.
Repression—Repression is the act of holding something down or back,
especially ideas and movements.
Example sentence: The governmental repression of revolutionary societies
became stronger each week.
Reverence—Reverence means showing great respect or a deep appreciation
for something.
Example sentence: When entering the throne room, it is always necessary to
show reverence for the king by bowing before him and kissing his ring.
Rhetoric—Rhetoric is the way in which people speak and argue to convey
their points. Different people may have different styles of rhetoric: They
may ask questions, they may use persuasive language, they may yell, they
may trick. All of those are types of rhetoric.
Example sentence: The country quickly got tired of the candidates’ loud
rhetorical blustering.
200
Sanction—Sanction is a very interesting word as it has seemingly opposite
meanings. Make sure you pay very close attention to the context.
Sometimes sanction refers to officially approving or allowing something to
happen. The school might sanction a dance, meaning it’s officially approved
by the administration. However, sanctions can also be negative—a penalty
for something done that is bad. Usually the context of negative sanctions is
legal; when the word is used in this manner, it often refers to one country
placing sanctions on another country for things like human rights violations.
Example sentence: “Just know that I do not sanction this event,” said the
major when the town council voted to have the festival against her wishes.
Scuttling—Scuttling is a very specific type of movement. It’s moving very
quickly with tiny (often not smooth) steps. Think about how crabs may run
along a beach—they’re almost always scuttling.
Example sentence: The pickpocket checked over his shoulder one more
time before scuttling down an alley with his ill-gotten gains.
Scenario—A scenario is the setup for a work of fiction, a book, movie, or
play. It can also be any imagined situation that people put themselves in,
such as discussing what could happen in the future or things that should
have happened in the past.
Example sentence: My English teacher proposed an interesting scenario—
what books would you take with you if you were stuck on a deserted
island?
Seamless—Think of a shirt without seams—it’s completely smooth and has
no breaks in the fabric. When something is seamless, it is very smooth. This
word is often used as a synonym for flawless.
Example sentence: The director was thrilled when the whole production
came together seamlessly.
Sentiment—A sentiment is how you feel or what you say about something
that has occurred.
Example sentence: While he expressed nice sentiments about being sorry,
she couldn’t bring herself to forgive his mistakes.
Sentinel—A sentinel is a soldier whose job it is to keep watch over
something.
Example sentence: The sentinel rushed to the general with news of
invaders.
Sequence—A sequence is the order that things are in or the order that they
should be in.
Example sentence: The librarian got very upset when she found out that her
assistant was shelving books in the wrong sequence.
Shingled—Something described as shingled would have the same layered
look as the shingles on a roof.
Example sentence: As odd as it looked, shingled hair was quite popular in
the early 2000s.
Skeptic—A skeptic is someone who is skeptical, or doubtful, of something.
Example sentence: Jack continued to power forward with his extravagant
plans, despite the loud voices of his skeptics.
Sluggish—When described as sluggish, things are slow or moving like a
slug.
Example sentence: I’m incredibly sluggish if I don’t have any coffee in the
morning.
Squalid—When described as squalid, things are run down, dirty, and often
infested with vermin. This is often the result of war or poverty.
Example sentence: Despite her best efforts at fixing and cleaning, the
apartment remained at best squalid and at worst unlivable.
Squelch—Squelch is an onomatopoeia; the word means the sound it makes.
Squelch is the sound that might be made if you tried to pull your foot out of
thick mud or if you stepped on a slug.
Example sentence: With soaking wet socks and shoes, every step squelched.
Stagnate—To stagnate is to stop moving forward. This is generally not
physical movement.
Example sentence: The project had stagnated, which caused great concern
with the management team.
Stewardship—A steward is someone who takes care of something.
Stewardship, then, is the noun form of the act of taking care of something.
Example sentence: As the result of careful stewardship, the manor survived
the 50 years of being boarded up with only a bit of dust to tell of the long
emptiness.
Stupefied—To be stupefied is to be made temporarily stupid. This
generally happens if something really sudden or unexpected occurs.
Example sentence: After witnessing the last-minute heartbreaking loss,
many fans left the stadium with stupefied looks on their faces.
Subjugate—To subjugate a person or group of people is to put them under
your total control. This is especially applicable in war-time situations when
entire populations are conquered and subjugated.
Example sentence: The hero rode gallantly into town, determined to free the
subjugated people.
Subordinate—Someone who is subordinate is lower in status, usually in a
workplace. A worker is subordinate to the boss.
Example sentence: The hallmark of a good manager is when they treat their
subordinates with care, kindness, and fairness.
Subsequent—Something that is subsequent comes after something else.
For example, my birthday is subsequent to that of my older sibling.
Example sentence: After getting a D on the midterm, he resolved to study
harder for any subsequent tests.
Substantial—When something is substantial, it is not insignificant, but
almost the opposite. It is of an important size or amount.
Example sentence: The restaurant lost a substantial amount of money when
it changed management.
Sufficient—When something is described as sufficient, it means that it is
enough.
Example sentence: While I was doubtful that we’d have enough food to
feed everyone, it ended up being a sufficient amount.
Supplemental—Something that is supplemental adds something
unnecessary, but helpful, to something else. There may be supplemental
information at the end of a chapter. A family may pay for a vacation with
supplemental income from a part-time job.
Example sentence: The supplemental assistance from neighbors helped the
family through tough times.
Sustenance—Sustenance is what sustains a person. Generally, this is used
as a fancy word for food.
Example sentence: After having been shipwrecked for months, the sailors
craved sustenance other than dried fish and leaves.
Swayed—To sway is to move slightly back and forth. However, this term
can be used figuratively as well as literally. In an argument, you may have
swayed your opponent. They didn’t actually move back and forth, but
maybe their opinions moved slightly.
Example sentence: As the boat swayed, I felt my stomach turn.
Symmetric—Something that is symmetric is the same on both sides. For
example, if a person has a symmetrical face, then the left and right sides of
their face would be identical.
Example sentence: By very definition, all circles must be symmetric in all
directions.
Synthetic—Something that is synthetic is made artificially, not naturally.
Example sentence: Clothing made from synthetic material may last longer,
but it also tends to breathe less, causing sweat, smells, and acne.
225
Sullen—To be sullen is to be grumpy and unenthusiastic. It is a type of bad
mood wherein you do things only under protest. You might think of it as
being related to sulking.
Example sentence: The sullen young man was often reprimanded by his
mother for his bad attitude.
Tactile—Something that is tactile has to do with the sense of touch. A
tactile sensation, for example, is a sensation of being touched in some way.
Example sentence: When I was young, I had a tactile disorder whereby the
feeling of grass and other things against my skin caused me great distress.
Tangible—Something that is tangible can be seen and touched (as
compared to the opposite intangible).
Example sentence: The tangible benefit of saving for retirement is
obviously the money; the intangible benefit is peace of mind.
Tedious—Something that is tedious is repetitive and boring. It takes a long
time and doesn’t engage the mind.
Example sentence: The tedious task of hand stitching clothing is thankfully
no longer necessary due to the advent of the sewing machine.
Tout—To tout is to aggressively try to sell something, to sing its praises to
get someone to buy it.
Example sentence: I left quickly when I discovered the so-called party was
just an excuse for the hostess to tout her overpriced essential oils.
Transaction—When something is a transaction, it has something to do with
the purchase or exchange of goods or services.
Example sentence: The person she thought was her friend was really just
interested in a transactional relationship.
Transit—To transit is to move from one place to another. As a noun, transit
can also refer to a network of public busses, trains, and streetcars.
Example sentence: Since her car had broken down, she found it necessary
to take public transit to work for a few weeks.
Traipsing—When one is traipsing, they are coming and going or moving in
a carefree manner.
Example sentence: He finally had to put a stop to the children traipsing in
and out of the house with their shoes covered in mud.
Tributary—A tributary is a stream or river upstream that feeds into a
bigger river.
Example sentence: The Ohio River, while large, is just a tributary of the
mighty Mississippi River.
Ubiquitous—When something is ubiquitous, it is found everywhere. It is
common.
Example sentence: The flags were ubiquitous in the highly patriotic town.
Unassuming—When something or someone is unassuming, they are
unthreatening and down to earth.
Example sentence: Everyone liked the high school principal. His
unassuming nature made him easy to work with.
Unrequited—When feelings are unrequited, they are not returned in kind.
This word is often used to describe one-sided love.
Example sentence: Driven mad by unrequited love, the story’s heroine
wandered the moors for the rest of her life and haunted her beloved after
her death.
Unseemly—Something that is unseemly might otherwise be described as
inappropriate for the situation.
Example sentence: While appropriate for milking cows, overalls are an
unseemly choice for a fine French restaurant.
Unstinting—Something that is unstinting is given without pause or second
thought.
Example sentence: My favorite teacher gave me unstinting support in my
quest for academic excellence.
Unveil—To unveil is to reveal. Think of a bride walking down the aisle
wearing her veil and then removing her veil to reveal her face to the groom.
Example sentence: The excitement was noticeable as the crowd waited for
the mayor to unveil the new city monument.
Usurp—To usurp is to overthrow. This word is often used to discuss
overthrowing governments and other authorities.
Example sentence: It is the duty of several agencies to find and arrest
anyone who intends to usurp the government.
Validate—To validate something is to say that it is valid, true, or accurate.
Quite often, businesses will validate parking. That is, they’ll stamp the
parking ticket to indicate that the person who parked had a true reason to be
there.
Example sentence: Though the woman claimed that she owned the house,
her words needed to be validated by calling the local public records office.
Vantage—Vantage is a spot with a good view to see what needs to be seen.
Example sentence: From their vantage point on the second story, they could
see the whole parade while staying nice and warm.
Verifiable—Something that is verifiable is able to be verified, or proven
correct. Facts are generally verifiable while opinions are not.
Example sentence: His alibi was not verifiable and so he was left on the list
of suspects.
Vernacular—The vernacular is the common or slang terms that people in a
given community use.
Example sentence: While parents might think it’s rude or confusing, most
students have vernacular terms that they and their friends use frequently.
Versatile—Something that is versatile can be used in many different ways.
Example sentence: Anytime you go camping you should take a good length
of cording. It’s a versatile tool that can help in many dangerous situations.
Vestigial—Something that is vestigial is a small left-behind part of
something much bigger.
Example sentence: The one standing hut was the vestigial remains of a
once-mighty empire.
Virtuous—Something that is virtuous has virtue, or a high sense of
morality.
Example sentence: The virtuous young people refused to take part in the
cheating ring that was quickly growing at their school.
Wayside—The wayside is exactly what it sounds like, the side of the road.
This term is also often used in a figurative sense.
Example sentence: It is often a sad fact of life that when someone begins
dating, their friends are pushed to the wayside.
Yearning—Yearning is to want something with all your heart. To crave it at
the expense of all else.
Example sentence: Although the young man liked his hometown, he felt a
sense of yearning for international travel.
250
PART 4
 Writing
Writing for the Digital SAT

Introduction and Strategies
What Is Tested on the SAT Writing?
When you write in academic settings and in your future career, you will
need to use correct grammar, proper wording, logical organization, and
persuasive evidence. The SAT Writing tests your skill in determining which
choices lead to the highest quality essays. In addition to your knowledge of
specific grammar rules, a broad understanding of written English will
ensure you do your very best on this section. When in doubt about your
approach to the SAT Writing, keep in mind that if you are using the same
skills that would be effective in editing a paper, you are likely doing things
the right way.

How Is the SAT Writing Structured?
 Part of the Reading and Writing Section (two modules of 27 questions
 each, 32 minutes each)
 The first Reading and Writing module will be of standard difficulty, and
 the second module will be more or less difficult depending on your
 performance on the first module.
 Approximately 25 of the 54 total Reading and Writing questions are
 Writing ones.
 Out of these 25 questions, about 14 relate to Standard English
 Conventions and about 11 relate to the Expression of Ideas.
 The writing questions come after the reading questions in a module.

SAT Writing Dos and Don’ts
Do use the full amount of time available. As you probably know from
having to edit papers for school, good editing takes time. Take
approximately 70 seconds to complete each of the Writing questions. Some
of the writing questions may take less time than some of the reading
questions, so allocate any extra time from writing questions to the earlier
reading questions. When you evaluate more complicated Writing questions,
you can make notes on the provided scrap paper so that you fully
understand what the question is asking.

Don’t rush and make careless errors. Students are usually aware when
they have difficulty with a Math or Reading question. With SAT Writing
questions, it is easy to think you are doing great but to actually make a
careless mistake. If you are still finishing the Reading and Writing section
with quite a bit of time left, you may want to slow down to be sure you are
getting all of the needed information and you fully understand the question
that is being asked. This is a better use of time than having a few minutes at
the end of the section to just sit there.

   Example

     The Roseto Effect is a concept that has expanded scientists’
     understanding of the effect of mental health on physical health. It has
     been found that there are some areas in which certain conditions, such
     as heart disease, are much less common. Scientists believe this may be
     due to the feeling of connectedness in the community contributing to
     greater mental health and thus positively __________ physical health.

     Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the
     conventions of Standard English?

     (A) influenced
     (B) influencing
     (C) has influence
     (D) had influenced
If you rush through a question like this, you will most likely make a
careless mistake. The final sentence of the text says that the feeling of
connectedness in the community “contributing” to greater mental health. In
order to maintain a parallel structure with the “ing” ending, the only
acceptable option would be (B). “Contributing” and “influencing” will
maintain parallelism. Choices (A), (C), and (D) all change the verb
structure such that a parallel style is not maintained. If you rush through a
question like this, you might think you are in good shape, when in fact you
missed a detail essential to correctly answering the question.

Do look at enough context. In general, be sure to read the entirety of the
given text. If you have any doubt about whether you have sufficient context
to make a decision, reread the context of the text just to be sure.

Don’t only consider part of a sentence. It is easy to jump to an answer
based on just a small part of a sentence. Keep an open mind as you read the
entirety of a sentence. If you have difficulty with jumping to answers too
quickly, try covering up the answer choices until you have carefully
considered the relevant context.

   Example

     Marquis went to his __________ house—he was eager to visit with
     both his mother and father.

     Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the
     conventions of Standard English?

     (A) parent’s
     (B) parents
     (C) parenting
     (D) parents’

Unless you consider the information later in the sentence, you will have
insufficient context to determine the correct option. The second part of the
sentence states that Marquis was going to meet with “both his mother and
father.” This clarifies that he was meeting with both parents, and it is
reasonable to infer that his mother and father shared the house. So, since
there are two parents, show possession by putting an apostrophe after the s
as found in choice (D). Choice (A) would work if you had a singular parent.
Choice (B) would work if you were using parents as a noun instead of using
the word to show possession. And choice (C) would suggest that Marquis is
going to some house where he does his own parenting, which is inconsistent
with the later part of the sentence.

Do mouth out the text as you read it. One of the best strategies for editing
a paper is to read it out loud in your head—that way, you will pick up on all
sorts of errors that you would miss if you only quickly scanned your paper.
Many of the correct answers on the SAT Writing can be found based on
how things sound. In particular, punctuation, proper verb use, and parallel
structure all lend themselves well to analysis through hearing. When taking
the SAT, your job is not to go in front of a class and precisely explain the
grammatical justification for an answer. Instead, you simply need to arrive
at the correct answer by any means necessary, including trusting your
hearing.

Don’t overly rely on intuition—know the rules. While hearing the
passage can be extremely helpful, use this approach to supplement rather
than replace careful analysis based on grammar knowledge. Many potential
grammar issues—like advanced punctuation concepts and subject-verb
agreement—won’t be clear unless you understand the underlying grammar
concepts. Fortunately, this book comprehensively reviews the grammar you
need to know.

   Example

     Teacher letters of recommendation are a key component of a college
     __________ is important for students to develop good relationships
     with their educators.

     Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the
     conventions of Standard English?
     (A) application; accordingly, it
     (B) application, accordingly, it
     (C) application; accordingly it
     (D) application accordingly, it

Mouthing this out can help you determine where natural pauses are needed.
First, a pause is needed between the two independent clauses (complete
sentences)—after “application” and before “accordingly.” Second, a pause
is needed after “accordingly,” since it is an introductory word before the
second independent clause. This intuitive knowledge will only get you so
far. It is important to know that a comma cannot join two independent
clauses together unless it has a conjunction like for, and, or but along with
it. Also, conjunctive adverbs like “accordingly” must have a semicolon
precede them when they are used to join two independent clauses. So, the
correct answer is choice (A) since it has a semicolon to separate the two
independent clauses and a comma to separate the introductory word
“accordingly” from the following independent clause. Intuition and
grammar knowledge together make for an unstoppable combination on the
SAT Writing questions.

Do use the choices to help clarify your thinking. The choices can help
you see where a question is headed—look at what is different among the
choices to determine what concept is being evaluated. If the choices use
different verbs, watch out for subject-verb agreement. If the choices use
different punctuation, watch for independent and dependent clauses. And if
the choices have different lengths, watch for wordiness. Also, if two or
more choices mean essentially the same thing, that is a clue that it will not
be those options. For example, since both a semicolon and a period can be
used to separate two independent clauses, if you see two options that only
differ in that one uses a period and one uses a semicolon, it is likely neither
of the options.

Don’t jump to a choice too quickly. Keep an open mind as you review the
choices. Be sure you have considered what the question is asking, what the
surrounding context says, and what the subtle differences among the
choices entail. Do not treat the SAT Writing questions like ones found on a
recall test you may find in school, in which you can quickly remember the
answer from class. Instead, take your time.

   Example

     I stayed up late last night studying for my test. __________ I am
     rather tired this morning. I am afraid my test results will not reflect
     my true knowledge of the material.

     Which choice completes the text with the most logical transition?

     (A) However,
     (B) In contrast,
     (C) Additionally,
     (D) Consequently,

The primary way you should attack this problem is to consider the logical
relationship between what comes before the transitional word and what
comes after it. The sentence before says that the narrator stayed up late
studying for a test, and the part after says that the narrator is now rather
tired. A transition that expresses a cause-and-effect relationship would be
best, since it is because the narrator stayed up late that now the narrator is
tired. “Consequently” in choice (D) signifies a cause-and-effect
relationship, and it is correct. In addition to attacking the problem this way,
you can look at the choices to see what clues are evident. First, all the
words are transitional, making it clear that you will need to look at what
comes before and after the underlined word to determine the correct answer.
Second, you can look for similarities among the answers. “However” and
“in contrast” are synonymous, both meaning that what comes before and
what comes after are opposites. Since these two options are synonymous,
you are able to eliminate them both. While this strategy is likely applicable
on just a handful of problems, it can be a powerful tool if you are trying to
break the tie between a couple of options.

Do consider widely agreed upon grammar rules. There will be one
definite answer. The makers of the SAT ensure that when they ask a
question, it has been thoroughly evaluated so that it clearly has a single
answer. The SAT Writing questions will ask you about core grammatical
concepts where there is widespread agreement, like subject-verb agreement,
proper verb tense, and correct use of punctuation. It is especially important
for students who are strong in math to keep this in mind, since they are used
to the definitive answers found in math and sometimes feel that grammar
rules are a matter of opinion. Keep in mind that while there are many ways
that an essay can be crafted, out of the four options given for each SAT
Writing question, there will be one and only one correct answer.

Don’t worry about stylistic preferences and pet peeves. Here are some
examples of pet peeves that some people have, which are not considered
widely agreed upon grammar rules:
 Using the Oxford comma—a comma before the and in a list of three or
 more items
 Never starting a sentence with because
 Never using the more informal second person, you, and always using the
 more formal third person, he, she, they, in papers

The SAT will not test you on concepts like this because not everyone agrees
on them. So, you should give the SAT Writing the benefit of the doubt—
instead of overthinking a question because you think it is testing some
random rule, know that there is indeed one correct answer and look at
enough context until you clearly see what that correct answer is.

   Example

     When preparing a college application essay, be sure to tell ______
     authentic story. If you have overcome significant challenges in your
     life or have had interesting experiences, the application essay is a
     great place to showcase your story.

     Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the
     conventions of Standard English?

     (A) one’s
     (B) her
     (C) their
     (D) your

Students are often told to avoid using the second person, “you,” in their
writing and instead use the third person, “he, she, or they.” While this is a
preference that many educators and writers may have, avoiding the second
person is not technically a grammar rule. In this text, we cannot tell from
the first sentence what word would be appropriate. It is only after
examining the second sentence and seeing that the writer uses “you” and
“your” that we realize that in order to be consistent with the wording,
choice (D) is correct. This is the only option that uses “you” just like the
second sentence does. By realizing that there is one definite answer and that
the SAT will not test you on pet peeves, you will be able to keep an open
mind as you evaluate the choices.

How Can I Improve My Overall Grammar Knowledge?
 Read widely. Reading will, of course, help you improve your reading
 comprehension. However, it will also greatly help you with grammar. By
 reading high-quality books and articles, you will develop an intuitive
 sense of what language sounds proper and what arguments are logically
 organized. This is especially important when building a sense of what
 word choices are most appropriate. If you rely too much on a thesaurus
 when coming up with synonyms, you may have difficulty identifying the
 word that is best to use in a given context.
 Write as much as you can. The more you write, the better you will be at
 determining what arguments flow well and what organization of your
 essays is most appropriate. You will have a better sense of how to avoid
 repetition, maintain parallel structure, and maintain subject-verb
 agreement. When you have had to be on the lookout for good writing
 strategies in your own writing, you will be much more in tune with
 looking for good strategies in the writing of other material.
 Take rigorous courses that encourage you to write and read high-
 quality material as much as possible. While it is tempting to take easier
 courses where it will not be difficult to earn an (A), this will ultimately be
 a disservice to you when it comes to SAT Writing questions. Take courses
 like AP English Language and Composition, AP English Literature and
 Composition, and any of the other AP humanities courses. All of these
 courses will require you to read challenging, high-quality material and to
 write organized essays. The stronger your reading and writing skills, the
 better you will do on the SAT Writing.
 Practice writing in your daily life. Do not limit your writing to the
 classroom. Look for opportunities to write recreationally. Instead of
 texting, try sending an email with full paragraphs. Instead of only video
 chatting with a distant friend or relative, try writing a letter. Instead of just
 scanning online articles, give your opinions in the online comments. If you
 are more ambitious, try entering writing contests, writing a blog of your
 own, or sending well-crafted correspondence to public officials with your
 opinions on important issues. Rather than waiting to the last minute to
 write your college application essays, begin working on them in your
 junior year so that you can both write the best possible essays and improve
 your writing and editing skills.
 Practice editing. Use a cloud-based word processing program so that you
 can easily have your papers edited—encourage your friends to do the
 same. If you and your friends practice editing one another’s papers, not
 only will your papers be far better, but you will also sharpen the skills
 needed for success on the SAT Writing.

How Can I Use This Book to Prepare for the SAT Writing?
Practice with the specific types of questions that are most challenging for
you:
 Subject-Verb Agreement (pages 223–228)
 Number and Tense Agreement (pages 229–231)
 Punctuation (pages 232–250)
 Sentence Structure and Organization (pages 251–259)
 Transitions (pages 260–270)
 Rhetorical Synthesis (pages 271–278)
Practice with the Additional Practice Exercises, starting on page 278,
reviewing the types of material you will encounter on the actual test.
Practice with Advanced Practice, starting on page 284, that present the
most challenging types of Writing questions you could encounter on the
SAT.

Practice with the full-length Reading and Writing tests, carefully
watching your time management.

Good luck!


Grammar Review
Subject-Verb Agreement

The SAT Writing tests your skill in determining whether nouns, pronouns,
and verbs agree numerically. A singular subject should be paired with a
singular verb, and a plural subject should be paired with a plural verb.

   Example 1

Incorrect: My friend’s brand new car need to be washed.

Correct: My friend’s brand new car needs to be washed.

Explanation: The subject is what is doing the action. In this case, the car is
the thing that has to be washed. Since the subject “car” is singular, it
requires a singular verb, “needs.”

   Example 2

Incorrect: The pack of wolves are howling.

Correct: The pack of wolves is howling.

Explanation: The subject is the singular word “pack,” not “wolves.” Even
though there are multiple wolves within a pack, the subject is still just the
singular “pack.” “Pack” is an example of a collective noun—the word refers
to the singular group instead of the plural members of the group. Some
other examples of collective nouns include group, flock, class, herd,
company, and collection. Watch out for prepositions—words like “to,” “of,”
“from,” and “in”—that typically come before a description of the subject. In
this example, “of” comes before “wolves,” with “of wolves” describing the
subject “pack.” If a word or phrase starts with a preposition, that will likely
not be the subject.

   Example 3
Incorrect: The smoke detector has dead batteries, which is why they are
beeping.

Correct: The smoke detector has dead batteries, which is why it is beeping.

Explanation: The earlier nouns in the sentence are “detector” and
“batteries.” Which of these could most logically be described as “beeping?”
It would have to be a detector—batteries don’t beep. So, both the pronoun
and the verb must change to be the singular “it is” instead of the plural
“they are.”

   Example 4
Incorrect: When Darnell and Liam go to the game, he always insists on
paying for the tickets.

Correct: When Darnell and Liam go to the game, Darnell always insists on
paying for the tickets.

Explanation: If a pronoun is vague, it must be clarified. In this case, the
“he” could have referred to either Darnell or Liam. By revising it to have
the person’s actual name, the sentence becomes clear. Sometimes students
worry about replacing a pronoun, thinking that they cannot be certain as to
its substitute. Do not worry about that—if a pronoun needs to be replaced
because it is vague, consider the potential replacements to be true.
   Example 5

Incorrect: Everybody in the school are excited for the assembly.

Correct: Everybody in the school is excited for the assembly.

Explanation: “Everybody” is singular, even though it refers to several
people. Other singular pronouns include everyone, anybody, no one,
someone, another, either, neither, and each. If you are unsure if a pronoun
is singular or plural, simply take the pronoun and place it next to the verb to
see if it makes sense. For example, you would say “anybody is here”
instead of “anybody are here.”

Singular and Plural Agreement Practice—select the correct choice given
the context.

 1. The food for both of my dogs (A) is or (B) are expensive.
 2. My friend Andrew forgot (A) its or (B) his lunch money.
 3. (A) These or (B) This books are really interesting.
 4. All the cars, including mine, (A) is or (B) are legally parked on the
    street and will not be towed.
 5. The flock of geese (A) are or (B) is migrating south for the winter.
 6. My English teacher and my math teacher always (A) give or (B) gives
    detailed instructions in class.
 7. The lamp, which has three light bulbs, (A) is or (B) are in need of
    some maintenance.
 8. I discovered in my studies that while I enjoyed painting and sculpture,
    (A) it was or (B) they were music I found most appealing.
 9. The sights and sounds of the World’s Fair (A) were or (B) was truly
    memorable.
10. A dog that can still walk on all fours (A) are or (B) is considered
    mobile.
11. When starting the car, be sure that (A) the emergency brake or (B) it is
    deactivated.
12. (A) Those or (B) This plants really have to be watered.
13. The captain of the team (A) has led or (B) have led her team to victory.
14. When one is speaking to one’s friends online, one should be certain
    that the chat is from one’s friends (A) themselves or (B) oneself and
    not from a bot.
15. The car and truck were in a close race, with (A) the one or (B) the
    truck currently in the lead.
16. Anyone who loves the great outdoors (A) is or (B) are excited for good
    weather.
17. Neither terrible snow nor awful rain (A) keeps or (B) keep the mail
    from being delivered.
18. Halley’s Comet, one of the solar system’s short period comets, (A) is
    or (B) are projected to pass by Earth in the year 2061.
19. Since (A) it or (B) they will not be available on the trail, bring food
    and water with you for the backpacking journey.
20. Zaha Hadid, an architect known for her parametric designs (i.e., ones
    that embrace adaptive shapes and forms), (A) are or (B) is a native of
    Iraq.

  Answers

 1. The food for both of my dogs (A) is expensive. “Food” is the subject
    and is singular.
 2. My friend Andrew forgot (B) his lunch money. “Andrew” is a
    singular person, so “his” would be appropriate.
 3. (A) These books are really interesting. “Books” is a plural word and
    “these” is used in reference to plural nouns.
 4. All the cars, including mine, (B) are legally parked on the street and
    will not be towed. In this case, “all” is referring to the entire set of
    cars and is plural.
 5. 5. The flock of geese (B) is migrating south for the winter. “Flock” is
    a collective noun and is singular.
 6. My English teacher and my math teacher always (A) give detailed
    instructions in class. There is a compound subject with both the
     English teacher and the math teacher, so the plural verb “give” is
     needed.
 7. The lamp, which has three light bulbs, (A) is in need of some
    maintenance. The subject is “lamp,” not “light bulbs,” and “lamp” is a
    singular word that needs the singular verb “is.”
 8. I discovered in my studies that while I enjoyed painting and sculpture,
    (A) it was music I found most appealing. The singular subject
    “music” comes later in the sentence, but it is in fact the thing that the
    narrator finds most appealing.
 9. The sights and sounds of the World’s Fair (A) were truly memorable.
    There is a compound subject—sights and sounds—that requires a
    plural verb, “were.”
10. A dog that can still walk on all fours (B) is considered mobile. The
    subject is the singular “dog,” not the plural “fours.” Thus, the singular
    verb “is” would be correct.
11. When starting the car, be sure that (A) the emergency brake is
    deactivated. In this case, there is a vague pronoun, so clarifying it by
    saying “the emergency brake” would be appropriate.
12. (A) Those plants really have to be watered. The word “plants” is
    plural, so the word “those” would be correct.
13. The captain of the team (A) has led her team to victory. The subject is
    “captain,” which is singular. A singular verb “has” is needed.
14. When one is speaking to one’s friends online, one should be certain
    that the chat is from one’s friends (A) themselves and not from a bot.
    The word “themselves” refers to the word “friends,” which is plural.
15. The car and truck were in a close race, with (B) the truck currently in
    the lead. The pronoun would be vague in this case, so clarify with
    “the truck.”
16. Anyone who loves the great outdoors (A) is excited for good weather.
    The word “anyone” is considered to be singular, so the singular “is”
      would match.
 17. Neither terrible snow nor awful rain (A) keeps the mail from being
     delivered. “Neither” and “nor” refer to objects one at a time instead of
     collectively, and require a singular verb; “keeps” is singular and
     would work.
 18. Halley’s Comet, one of the solar system’s short period comets, (A) is
     projected to pass by Earth in the year 2061. The verb must agree with
     the singular “comet,” not the plural “comets,” since it is the “comet”
     that will be coming by Earth in the future.
 19. Since (B) they will not be available on the trail, bring food and water
     with you for the backpacking journey. The plural word “they” refers
     to the plural “food and water” that should go on the trail with a hiker.
 20. Zaha Hadid, an architect known for her parametric designs (i.e., ones
     that embrace adaptive shapes and forms), (B) is a native of Iraq. Go
     back to the beginning of the sentence to see that the subject is the
     singular person Zaha Hadid, and not the other possible nouns like
     “designs,” “shapes,” or “forms.”

Verb Agreement

The SAT Writing will test your skill in verb usage. You will often be asked
to determine whether a verb is used in the correct tense. Be aware of the
basics of verb conjugation, as outlined in this table (you may have learned
quite a bit of verb conjugation in a world language course).

            Present                   Past                       Future
 She is                   She was                    She will
 They are                 They were                  They will
 I am                     I was                      I will
     Present Perfect            Past Perfect             Future Perfect
 She has been             She had been               She will have been
 They have been           They had been              They will have been
 I have been              I had been                 I will have been
   Example 1

Incorrect: I went on a trip to Florida, and I have a memorable experience.

Correct: I went on a trip to Florida, and I had a memorable experience.

Explanation: Make sure that the verbs are used consistently in the sentence.
Change “have” to “had” so that the sentence is all in the past tense.

   Example 2

Incorrect: My friend’s group has been working hard on the school project,
while most of the other groups are not doing so.

Correct: My friend’s group has been working hard on the school project,
while most of the other groups have not been doing so.

Explanation: The project has not yet been completed—it is an ongoing
activity, so the present perfect tense is appropriate.

   Example 3

In addition to ensuring that verbs are in the correct tense, the SAT Writing
will ask questions to check for both tense and number agreement.

Incorrect: When Eli lived across from two excellent parks, he have ample
opportunities for outdoor recreation.

Correct: When Eli lived across from two excellent parks, he had ample
opportunities for outdoor recreation.

Explanation: In the first version, “have” is incorrect with subject-verb
agreement and tense. In the corrected version, “had” uses the correct past
tense and is numerically consistent with the subject “Eli.”

Verb Agreement Practice—select the correct choice given the context.
 1. Yesterday, I (A) ate or (B) eat lunch at home.
 2. Whenever I walk past that store, I always (A) felt or (B) feel like
    making a purchase.
 3. My two aunts have always (A) taken or (B) took the bus to work.
 4. The large boulder fell into the river and (A) diverted or (B) divert the
    water out of its typical path.
 5. You should leave a nice review for a travel guide who (A) do or (B)
    does a good job.
 6. Before watching the sequel, I (A) watching or (B) watched the
    prequel.
 7. They have been swimming since early this morning and (A) is or (B)
    are continuing to do so now.
 8. If you have the instructions, assembly of the new bicycle (A) were or
    (B) is easy.
 9. It would (A) have or (B) had been an easy test if I had studied some
    more.
10. My neighbor will not (A) entertained or (B) entertain any new offers to
    purchase his old car.
11. When she flew to visit her relatives overseas, she (A) took or (B) takes
    only two flights.
12. The Renaissance artist (A) draws or (B) drew pencil sketches before
    he turned his ideas into paintings.
13. I will read my textbook this evening after I (A) had completed or (B)
    complete my other homework.
14. An infant may have trouble falling asleep, while teenagers rarely (A)
    has or (B) have any difficulty doing so.
15. The guard dog barked at a predator that (A) approached or (B) will
    approach the herd of sheep.
16. My father is unsure of what dish to (A) brought or (B) bring to the
    potluck dinner.
17. The flock of birds (A) have or (B) has taken off from the steep cliff to
    find food.
18. Emma did a great job on her last assignment, and I am confident she
    (A) will do or (B) had done well on the one due next week.
19. Jesse Owens, winner of four Olympic gold medals, (A) was or (B)
    were born in Oakville, Alabama.
20. What colleges have you (A) chose or (B) chosen for your in-person
    visits?

  Answers

  1. Yesterday, I (A) ate lunch at home.
     “Ate” is in the past tense, which makes sense given that the sentence
     begins with “yesterday,” putting the event in the past.

  2. Whenever I walk past that store, I always (B) feel like making a
     purchase.
     “Feel” is in the present tense, consistent with the earlier present
     tense verb “walk.”

  3. My two aunts have always (A) taken the bus to work.
     “Have taken” is the correct conjugation, while “have took” would
     not work; “took” by itself is fine to express the past tense, but not in
     conjunction with “have.”

  4. The large boulder fell into the river and (A) diverted the water out of
     its typical path.
     The earlier verb “fell” is in the past tense, so use “diverted” to be
     consistent throughout the sentence.

  5. You should leave a nice review for a travel guide who (B) does a
     good job.
     The noun “guide” is singular and therefore requires a singular verb,
     “does.”

  6. Before watching the sequel, I (B) watched the prequel.
     Using “watched” is logical given that this is a past series of events;
     also, using “watching” would prevent this from being a complete
     sentence.

  7. They have been swimming since early this morning and (B) are
     continuing to do so now.
     “Are” is consistent with the earlier subject “they.”
 8. If you have the instructions, assembly of the new bicycle (B) is easy.
    “Is” will keep the sentence in the present tense, and it will be
    consistent with the singular subject “assembly.”

 9. It would (A) have been an easy test if I had studied some more.
    Use “have” in conjunction with “would have.” It can be fine to say
    “if it had,” but do not use the word “would” along with “had.”

10. My neighbor will not (B) entertain any new offers to purchase his
    old car.
    “Will not entertain” is the proper conjugation to express that this
    will take place in the future; “entertained” is fine as a past tense
    option, but not along with “will not.”

11. When she flew to visit her relatives overseas, she (A) took only two
    flights.
    “Took” is consistent with the earlier past tense verb “flew.”

12. The Renaissance artist (B) drew pencil sketches before he turned his
    ideas into paintings.
    Look later in the sentence to see that it is in the past tense given the
    verb “turned”; therefore, use the past tense “drew” for consistency.

13. I will read my textbook this evening after I (B) complete my other
     homework.
     Since the textbook reading is happening in the future after the
     completion of the homework, it is appropriate to use the present
     tense for “complete.”

14. An infant may have trouble falling asleep, while teenagers rarely (B)
    have any difficulty doing so.
    “Have” will be consistent with the plural subject “teenagers.”

15. The guard dog barked at a predator that (A) approached the herd of
    sheep.
    “Approached” is consistent with the past tense verb “barked” earlier
    in the sentence.
 16. My father is unsure of what dish to (B) bring to the potluck dinner.
     “To bring” is the correct infinitive form of the verb, not “to
     brought.”

 17. The flock of birds (B) has taken off from the steep cliff to find food.
     The subject is the singular noun “flock,” so “has” would be
     consistent with it.

 18. Emma did a great job on her last assignment, and I am confident she
     (A) will do well on the one due next week.
     Based on context clues, the correct verb will be “will do” since the
     next assignment is one that has not yet been evaluated.

 19. Jesse Owens, winner of four Olympic gold medals, (A) was born in
      Oakville, Alabama.
      The subject is the singular person “Jesse Owens,” not the plural
      “medals”; therefore, use the singular verb “was.”

 20. What colleges have you (B) chosen for your in-person visits?
     “Have chosen” is the correct conjugation of the verb, not “have
     chose.”

Number and Tense Agreement Practice Questions
 1. Anyone who assembles comic book collections probably _______
    superheroes. After all, Batman, Superman, Wonder Woman, and
    Spiderman are some of the most popular characters found in these
    books.

    Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the
    conventions of Standard English?

    (A) enjoy
    (B) enjoying
    (C) enjoys
    (D) to enjoy
2. The two hockey teams were evenly matched—throughout the game,
   the team that was ahead changed many times. After a hard-fought
   contest, the __________________. Ultimately their goalie’s defensive
   prowess proved pivotal.

   Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the
   conventions of Standard English?

   (A) blue team won the game.
   (B) game was won by the blue team.
   (C) winning by the blue team was completed.
   (D) blue team winning of the game was done.

3. A variety of diplomats gathered at the conference to discuss the new
   treaty. Out of the officials present, the Secretary General of the United
   Nations _____ the most well-respected.

   Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the
   conventions of Standard English?

   (A) will
   (B) were
   (C) are
   (D) was

4. Three years ago, she went on vacation and _______ her relatives. Now
   she is going to do a similar trip with her family but plans to go to a
   different destination.

   Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the
   conventions of Standard English?

   (A) will visit
   (B) visited
   (C) visiting
   (D) visit
5. The three friends were excited to meet up for a stroll in the new city
   park. Jennifer and Debby couldn’t wait to see _____ new dog.

   Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the
   conventions of Standard English?

   (A) her
   (B) their
   (C) Pam’s
   (D) whose

6. Now that we have started the new employee training, I must make my
   expectations about tardiness very clear. I require that everyone ____
   punctual. If you cannot show up on time for the job, you might as well
   not show up at all.

   Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the
   conventions of Standard English?

   (A) is
   (B) be
   (C) are
   (D) was

7. When you are looking for a new job, there are a few things to keep in
   mind. You should work on your networking skills, _______ resume,
   and your references.

   Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the
   conventions of Standard English?

   (A) your
   (B) one’s
   (C) you’re
   (D) its
 8. My friend and I went on a hike around the lake. We saw fish, plants,
    and plenty of birds. In fact, there was a flock of geese that ____ at
    least 30 birds.

     Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the
     conventions of Standard English?

     (A) has
     (B) have
     (C) had
     (D) having

 9. Make sure you are ready the day before the SAT with everything that
    you will need. Because _______ not provided at the testing center, a
    bottle of water and a snack are two things you should take with you.

     Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the
     conventions of Standard English?

     (A) they are
     (B) it is
     (C) you are
     (D) we are

10. We look out the window of our apartment and can see many things
     happening. There are people walking on the sidewalk and kids playing
     on the playground. Also, ____________________________

     Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the
     conventions of Standard English?

     (A) the cars driving down the freeway.
     (B) the cars are driving down the freeway.
     (C) the cars are drive down the freeway.
     (D) the cars down the freeway driving.
Answer Explanations

 1. (C) The subject is “anyone,” which is singular—it refers to each
     person one at a time. “Enjoys” is the only verb that would work to
     provide a complete sentence that aligns with a singular subject.

 2. (A) This option puts the words in the most logical order, making it
     clear that the blue team won the game. Choices (B) and (C) use the
     passive voice with “by.” Choice (D) has a convoluted word order.

 3. (D) This verb aligns with the singular person of the “Secretary
     General,” so the singular verb “was” works. Also, it is in the past
     tense, consistent with the earlier past tense verb “gathered.” The other
     options are either in the incorrect tense, like “will,” or plural, like
     “were” and “are.”

 4. (B) The verb “went” earlier in the sentence is in the past tense, and
     “visited” is the only option that is also in the past tense.

 5. (C) Pronouns are perfectly fine to use so long as what they represent is
     clear. In this sentence, it is unclear who possesses the dog unless the
     owner is specifically named as in choice (C). The other options
     would leave the ownership unclear.

 6. (B) Since this is a demand, the verb “be” is appropriate. The other
     options would not be typically used in a command.

 7. (A) This is the only option that maintains parallelism with the other
     parts of the list—they all begin with “your.”

 8. (C) “Had” is consistent with the past tense verb “was” earlier in the
     sentence. The other options are not in the past tense.

 9. (A) To see what pronoun is needed, look at what comes later in the
     sentence. A watch and a snack are the things that are not provided, so
     in reference to these two things, “they” is the only possibility.
10. (B) This option puts the words in a logical sequence and provides a
     complete sentence by saying “cars are driving.” Choices (A) and (D)
     result in a sentence fragment. Choice (C) should use “driven” instead
     of “drive” in conjunction with “are.”

Punctuation

Commas
When it comes to comma questions on the SAT, it is important to know
both when to use a comma and when NOT to use a comma. You may be
able to intuitively tell when to use a comma by mouthing out the sentence
in your head and “hearing” where a small breath or pause would be.
However, it is helpful to know specific rules about when and when not to
use commas so that you can do your best.

Do use a comma to separate an introductory phrase (dependent clause)
from a complete sentence (independent clause).

Correct: Whenever my brother sleeps, he snores loudly.

Correct: If you are happy with your grade, put the paper on your
refrigerator.

Explanation: In both of these examples, there is an introductory phrase
followed by a complete sentence. A comma is great for separating
dependent clauses (incomplete thoughts that cannot stand on their own)
from complete sentences (a complete idea with both a subject and a verb).

Don’t use a comma by itself to join two complete sentences
(independent clauses).

Incorrect: Jean went for a walk around town, she saw many different
neighborhoods.

Correct: Jean went for a walk around town, and she saw many different
neighborhoods.
Incorrect: My friend loves to paint, he makes large messes when doing so.

Correct: My friend loves to paint, but he makes large messes when doing
so.

Explanation: A comma by itself cannot separate one complete sentence
from another—this error is called a comma splice. If you had a word like
and, but, or yet along with the comma, that would be fine. Also, a
semicolon, period, and sometimes a dash or colon can work to separate
complete sentences.

Do use a comma before and after a parenthetical phrase (i.e., words
that are added to a sentence without changing the original sentence’s
grammar or meaning).

Correct: The first person to walk on the moon, Neil Armstrong, is a native
of the state of Ohio.

Correct: Jigsaw puzzles, unlike crossword puzzles, involve visual pattern
recognition.

Correct: A box of my favorite cereal, which I purchased on sale, is what my
family will have for breakfast this week.

Explanation: The phrases “Neil Armstrong,” “unlike crossword puzzles,”
and “which I purchased on sale” could be removed from the original
sentences and the sentences would remain complete with their original
meanings. Note that parenthetical phrases will often start with which. (If
which is used without a parenthetical phrase, like “the building in which I
will take the SAT,” no comma before which is needed).

Don’t use a comma to separate the subject from the verb in a sentence.

Incorrect: My best friend, is moving out of town.

Correct: My best friend is moving out of town.
Incorrect: Football players and basketball players, both use locker rooms to
get ready.

Correct: Football players and basketball players both use locker rooms to
get ready.

Incorrect: The book, that I have almost finished is very suspenseful.

Correct: The book that I have almost finished is very suspenseful.

Explanation: These sentences would work if the commas were removed.
Just because a sentence has a long subject does not mean that it requires a
comma. Note that phrases that do not require a comma will often start with
that. That indicates that a phrase is restrictive, or essential, to the sentence’s
meaning.

Do use a comma to separate words within a list.

Correct: I will pick up apples, bananas, and oranges at the fruit stand.

Don’t use a comma right before a list begins.

Incorrect: At the fruit stand, I will pick up, oranges, apples, and bananas.

Correct: At the fruit stand, I will pick up oranges, apples, and bananas.

Explanation: There is no need for a comma after “pick up” in the second
sentence. Just use commas to separate the items within the list.

Note: The SAT uses the Oxford comma with lists: the comma before the
and that comes before the final item. However, since the Oxford comma is
more of a stylistic choice than a grammar rule, they most likely will not test
you on this concept.

Do use a comma along with coordinating conjunctions to connect two
complete sentences. Coordinating conjunctions provide a strong
connection between sentences. Remember coordinating conjunctions
with the acronym FANBOYS (For, And, Nor, But, Or, Yet, So).
Correct: My sister was hungry, so she grabbed a snack from the kitchen.

Correct: I studied quite a bit for the test, but I did not perform as well as I
would have liked.

Don’t just use a comma to connect two complete sentences joined by a
conjunctive adverb (e.g., however, indeed, nevertheless, moreover,
namely, meanwhile, subsequently, thus, furthermore). Conjunctive
adverbs provide a weaker connection between sentences. Instead, use a
semicolon with a comma.

Incorrect: He was delighted to be promoted, however, he was not happy
with the new work schedule.

Correct: He was delighted to be promoted; however, he was not happy with
the new work schedule.

Incorrect: The tour started at the museum, subsequently, it went to the park.

Correct: The tour started at the museum; subsequently, it went to the park.

Note: It is fine to use conjunctive adverbs with just commas so long as they
are not used to connect two complete sentences:

Correct: My friend wanted me to come to his house. Instead, I decided to
stay home.

Correct: Most birds can fly. The penguin, however, cannot.

Explanation: While a comma by itself is not enough to join two complete
sentences, a comma along with one of the FANBOYS words will be
enough. Be sure that the word joining the two complete sentences is one of
these FANBOYS words—if it is one of the conjunctive adverbs, use a
semicolon before the conjunctive adverb and a comma after the conjunctive
adverb to make the connection.
Do use commas to separate adjectives if the order of the adjectives does
not matter.

Correct: The fluffy, friendly puppy likes to wag its tail.

Correct: The friendly, fluffy puppy likes to wag its tail.

Explanation: It does not change the meaning of the sentence whether
“fluffy” or “friendly” comes first.

Don’t use commas to separate adjectives if the order of the adjectives
does matter.

Incorrect: The first, female governor won a large majority of the vote.

Incorrect: The female, first governor won a large majority of the vote.

Correct: The first female governor won a large majority of the vote.

Explanation: The order of the adjectives “first” and “female” does matter
—“first” must come before “female” in order for the sentence to be logical.
In this situation, do not use commas to separate the adjectives.

Comma Practice—select the better sentence out of the two options.

 1. (A) Once upon a time, the kingdom was under attack.
    (B) Once upon a time the kingdom was under attack.

 2. (A) My Advanced Placement World History class, is very interesting.
    (B) My Advanced Placement World History class is very interesting.

 3. (A) I needed a quiet place to read, so I went to the library.
    (B) I needed a quiet place to read so I went to the library.

 4. (A) The pedestal onto, which you place the trophies should be sturdy.
    (B) The pedestal onto which you place the trophies should be sturdy.
 5. (A) If you are going to do well on your test, be sure to get a good
    night’s sleep.
    (B) If you are going to do well on your test be sure to get a good
    night’s sleep.

 6. (A) One example of a large animal, is the blue whale.
    (B) One example of a large animal is the blue whale.

 7. (A) The first person to walk across Antarctica without any assistance
    Colin O’Brady took 54 days to do so.
    (B) The first person to walk across Antarctica without any assistance,
    Colin O’Brady, took 54 days to do so.

 8. (A) Essential ingredients for the cake are flour, sugar, and eggs.
    (B) Essential ingredients for the cake are flour sugar and eggs.

 9. (A) The results of the study, indicate that the medicine is highly
    effective.
    (B) The results of the study indicate that the medicine is highly
    effective.

10. (A) The saw is extremely precise, cutting each edge flawlessly.
    (B) The saw is extremely precise cutting each edge flawlessly.

11. (A) Broccoli, though not my friend’s favorite, is something I love to
    eat whenever I can.
    (B) Broccoli though not my friend’s favorite is something I love to eat
    whenever I can.

12. (A) The chair that is by the window is extremely comfortable.
    (B) The chair, that is by the window, is extremely comfortable.

13. (A) Each morning, I like to take a shower, eat breakfast, and gather my
    things for school.
    (B) Each morning, I like to take a shower eat breakfast, and gather my
    things for school.
14. (A) Inflation is largely attributable to the ever-increasing prices of
    different goods and services.
    (B) Inflation is largely attributable, to the ever-increasing prices of
    different goods and services.

15. (A) The ping-pong table in the middle of the gymnasium, is where I
    spend my time after eating lunch.
    (B) The ping-pong table in the middle of the gymnasium is where I
    spend my time after eating lunch.

16. (A) Our house, which we moved into last year, is still in good
    condition.
    (B) Our house which we moved into last year is still in good condition.

17. (A) The job of a lifeguard, is to vigilantly keep watch over the beach.
    (B) The job of a lifeguard is to vigilantly keep watch over the beach.

18. (A) You did an excellent job on your group project; moreover, you
    aced your final exam.
    (B) You did an excellent job on your group project, moreover, you
    aced your final exam.

19. (A) My newest neighbor Jian, loves to play basketball in his driveway.
    (B) My newest neighbor, Jian, loves to play basketball in his driveway.

20. (A) If you are passionate about your profession, work will not feel like
    “work.”
    (B) If you are passionate about your profession work will not feel like
    “work.”

21. (A) The new volleyball coach, was excited for the team’s first game.
    (B) The new volleyball coach was excited for the team’s first game.

22. (A) Cold-brewed coffee, though not my personal favorite, has become
    increasingly popular.
    (B) Cold-brewed coffee, though not my personal favorite has become
    increasingly popular.
23. (A) The traffic, that clogged up the highway for eight straight miles,
    was quite a nuisance.
    (B) The traffic that clogged up the highway for eight straight miles was
    quite a nuisance.

24. (A) My videoconferencing software which I just updated helped me to
    meet with faraway relatives.
    (B) My videoconferencing software, which I just updated, helped me
    to meet with faraway relatives.

25. (A) Several thousand years ago, people, along with many animals,
    traversed an ice bridge from Eurasia to the Americas.
    (B) Several thousand years ago people, along with many animals
    traversed an ice bridge from Eurasia to the Americas.

  Answers

 1. (A) Once upon a time, the kingdom was under attack.
    Place a comma after the introductory phrase.

 2. (B) My Advanced Placement World History class is very interesting.
    Don’t separate the subject from the verb with a comma.

 3. (A) I needed a quiet place to read, so I went to the library.
    “So” is one of the FANBOYS words, and can therefore be used to join
    two sentences along with a comma.

 4. (B) The pedestal onto which you place the trophies should be sturdy.
    This is an example of using “which” when it does not precede a
    parenthetical phrase—thus, no comma is needed.

 5. (A) If you are going to do well on your test, be sure to get a good
    night’s sleep.
    Use a comma to separate the introductory phrase from the complete
    sentence that follows.

 6. (B) One example of a large animal is the blue whale.
     There is no need to separate the subject and the verb.

 7. (B) The first person to walk across Antarctica without any assistance,
    Colin O’Brady, took 54 days to do so.
    Surround the name with commas since the sentence will maintain its
    meaning and grammar without it.

 8. (A) Essential ingredients for the cake are flour, sugar, and eggs.
    Use commas to separate the items in the list.

 9. (B) The results of the study indicate that the medicine is highly
    effective.
    There is no need to separate the subject and the verb with a comma.

10. (A) The saw is extremely precise, cutting each edge flawlessly.
    Use a comma to separate the complete sentence from the dependent
    clause that follows.

11. (A) Broccoli, though not my friend’s favorite, is something I love to
    eat whenever I can.
    Surround the parenthetical phrase with commas.

12. (A) The chair that is by the window is extremely comfortable.
    The is no need for commas when using “that” to describe something
    essential to the subject.

13. (A) Each morning, I like to take a shower, eat breakfast, and gather
    my things for school. Use commas to separate the items in the list.

14. (A) Inflation is largely attributable to the ever-increasing prices of
    different goods and services.
    Do not use a comma to break up the phrase “attributable to.”

15. (B) The ping-pong table in the middle of the gymnasium is where I
    spend my time after eating lunch.
    Even though there is a long subject in the sentence, do not use a
    comma to separate the subject from the verb.
16. (A) Our house, which we moved into last year, is still in good
    condition.
    Use commas around the parenthetical phrase that begins with
    “which.”

17. (B) The job of a lifeguard is to vigilantly keep watch over the beach.
    Do not separate the subject from the verb.

18. (A) You did an excellent job on your group project; moreover, you
    aced your final exam. Use a semicolon, not a comma, to separate two
    sentences joined by a conjunctive adverb.

19. (B) My newest neighbor, Jian, loves to play basketball in his
    driveway.
    “Jian” is the same person as “my newest neighbor,” so his name can
    be set off with commas.

20. (A) If you are passionate about your profession, work will not feel like
    “work.”
    Use commas to separate the introductory phrase from the complete
    sentence that follows.

21. (B) The new volleyball coach was excited for the team’s first game.
    Do not separate the subject from the verb.

22. (A) Cold-brewed coffee, though not my personal favorite, has become
    increasingly popular. Surround the parenthetical phrase with commas.

23. (B) The traffic that clogged up the highway for eight straight miles
    was quite a nuisance.
    No commas are needed to surround an essential phrase starting with
    “that.”

24. (B) My videoconferencing software, which I just updated, helped me
    to meet with faraway relatives.
    Surround the parenthetical, nonessential phrase that begins with
    “which” with commas.
25. (A) Several thousand years ago, people, along with many animals,
    traversed an ice bridge from Eurasia to the Americas.
    Use a comma after “people” to separate the introductory phrase, and
    also use commas around the parenthetical phrase “along with many
    animals.”

Semicolons

Use a semicolon (;) to separate two complete, related sentences from
one another. While a period could be substituted for a semicolon in most
cases, using the semicolon allows for more stylistic variety in one’s writing.

Correct: I am excited to go to the concert; I will show up early to be first in
line.

Incorrect: While I am excited to go to the concert; there is no way I want to
show up early to wait.

Correct: While I am excited to go to the concert, there is no way I want to
show up early to wait.

Explanation: If there are complete sentences on either side of the
semicolon, it is appropriate to use one. If there is a sentence fragment on
either side of the semicolon, change the sentence structure (perhaps by
substituting a comma for the semicolon) to make it work.

Use a semicolon to separate items in a list when each item has internal
punctuation, like a comma, within it.

Correct: When I tour colleges, I am looking forward to checking out
Boston, Massachusetts; Ithaca, New York; and Providence, Rhode Island.

Incorrect: When I tour colleges, I am looking forward to checking out
Boston, Massachusetts, Ithaca, New York, and Providence, Rhode Island.

Explanation: The semicolons create a clear distinction between each place
that is denoted as a city and state. Without the semicolons to separate these
items, it would seem like the cities and states were different things.

Semicolon Practice—select the better sentence out of the two options.

 1. (A) This is the best book I have ever read, I simply cannot put it down.
    (B) This is the best book I have ever read; I simply cannot put it down.

 2. (A) A positive attitude can help you overcome adversity, no matter the
    circumstances.
    (B) A positive attitude can help you overcome adversity; no matter the
    circumstances.

 3. (A) It was supposed to be a cloudy day, however, the weather forecast
    was fortunately incorrect.
    (B) It was supposed to be a cloudy day; however, the weather forecast
    was fortunately incorrect.

 4. (A) The most critical people on the movie set are John, the director;
    Susan, the producer; and Harris, the lead actor.
    (B) The most critical people on the movie set are John, the director,
    Susan, the producer, and Harris, the lead actor.

 5. (A) If the grass is dry, water the lawn.
    (B) If the grass is dry; water the lawn.

   Answers

 1. (B) This is the best book I have ever read; I simply cannot put it down.
    Use a semicolon to separate the two complete sentences.

 2. (A) A positive attitude can help you overcome adversity, no matter the
    circumstances.
    “No matter the circumstances” is not a complete sentence, so separate
    it from the complete sentence that comes before it with a comma.

 3. (B) It was supposed to be a cloudy day; however, the weather forecast
    was fortunately incorrect.
     Recall that with conjunctive adverbs (like “however”) that join two
     complete sentences, use a semicolon followed by a comma.

 4. (A) The most critical people on the movie set are John, the director;
    Susan, the producer; and Harris, the lead actor.
    Use semicolons to separate the items in the list that have internal
    punctuation.

 5. (A) If the grass is dry, water the lawn.
    A comma will work to separate the introductory phrase from the
    complete sentence.

Colons

Use a colon (:) if it comes after a complete sentence and introduces a
clarification or a list. If an idea is not fully expressed, the colon can set off
the information that will complete the thought.

Correct: After many years of hard work, I have achieved my lifelong
dream: hiking up a tall mountain.

Correct: French mirepoix uses these ingredients: carrots, onions, and celery.

Colon Practice—select the better sentence out of the two options.

 1. (A) My houseplant requires the following to thrive sunlight, fertilizer,
    and water.
    (B) My houseplant requires the following to thrive: sunlight, fertilizer,
    and water.

 2. (A) The office workers finally agreed on the setting for the thermostat:
    72 degrees.
    (B) The office workers finally: agreed on the setting for the thermostat
    72 degrees.

 3. (A) You should take: your suitcase, backpack, and wallet with you on
    the trip.
   (B) You should take your suitcase, backpack, and wallet with you on
   the trip.

4. (A) We were delighted to see two of our favorite animals at the zoo:
   elephants and tigers.
   (B) We were delighted to see two of our favorite animals at the zoo
   elephants and tigers.

5. (A) No matter how you choose to season your food, salt and pepper
   are recommended items to have on a dinner table.
   (B) No matter how you choose to season your food: salt and pepper are
   recommended items to have on a dinner table.

 Answers

1. (B) My houseplant requires the following to thrive: sunlight, fertilizer,
   and water.
   The colon comes before the list of items the plant requires to thrive.

2. (A) The office workers finally agreed on the setting for the thermostat:
   72 degrees.
   This is the correct placement for the colon since it comes after a
   complete sentence and before a clarification.

3. (B) You should take your suitcase, backpack, and wallet with you on
   the trip.
   Not every list will require a colon to come before it. In this case, a
   colon would cause a very abrupt pause.

4. (A) We were delighted to see two of our favorite animals at the zoo:
   elephants and tigers. The colon comes before the clarification of
   which animals were at the zoo.

5. (A) No matter how you choose to season your food, salt and pepper
   are recommended items to have on a dinner table.
   Since “No matter how you choose to season your food” is not a
   complete sentence, having a colon after it would not work. Use a
     comma instead.

Dashes

Use a dash (—) to indicate a change of thought or change of voice in a
sentence.

Correct: I would not go down that alley—it looks very spooky.

Correct: Wait—I am not ready to go.

Use dashes to surround a parenthetical phrase. Start and finish the
parenthetical phrase using the same punctuation, like commas, dashes, or
parentheses.

Correct: Las Vegas—a major tourist town—is surprisingly surrounded by
desert.

Incorrect: Las Vegas—a major tourist town, is surprisingly surrounded by
desert.

Note: With the above examples, other forms of punctuation could have
been used instead of the dash. You have a great deal of flexibility in your
punctuation choices in more complex sentences. However, do not worry
about whether the SAT will have two correct options. If a colon could be
used for a dash and vice versa, only one of these options will be presented.

Dash Practice—select the better sentence out of the two options.

 1. (A) My favorite food—pizza—is easily found at many restaurants.
    (B) My favorite food, pizza—is easily found at many restaurants.

 2. (A) The backpacking journey looks quite challenging—be prepared.
    (B) The backpacking journey looks quite challenging be prepared.

 3. (A) My science teacher—a former government researcher—is
    excellent at helping us see the applications of what we learn.
   (B) My science teacher—a former government researcher is excellent
   at helping us see the applications of what we learn.

4. (A) Based on the latest data, the geologists could only come to one
   conclusion—a volcanic eruption was imminent.
   (B) Based on the latest data, the geologists could only come to one
   conclusion a volcanic eruption was imminent.

5. (A) My friends Sharon and Maria are coming over to my house this
   evening.
   (B) My friends Sharon—and Maria—are coming over to my house this
   evening.

 Answers

1. (A) My favorite food—pizza—is easily found at many restaurants.
   Be consistent in using the same type of punctuation on either side of
   parenthetical phrases.

2. (A) The backpacking journey looks quite challenging—be prepared.
   Have a dash toward the end of the sentence to indicate the change of
   thought.

3. (A) My science teacher—a former government researcher—is
   excellent at helping us see the applications of what we learn.
   Surround the clarification about the science teacher’s background with
   dashes.

4. (A) Based on the latest data, the geologists could only come to one
   conclusion—a volcanic eruption was imminent.
   Have a dash before the clarification of what the conclusion was.

5. (A) My friends Sharon and Maria are coming over to my house this
   evening.
   There is no need for dashes in this situation because there is no
   parenthetical phrase. Instead, “Maria” is part of the subject.
Apostrophes

Common Situations

Use an apostrophe (’) before an s to show singular possession.
 One pet’s dish
 A person’s house
 Caitlin’s shoes
 My car’s steering wheel
Use an apostrophe after an s to show plural possession.
 Three pets’ fence
 Seven cars’ parking lot spaces
 Our books’ shelf
 Three families’ neighborhood

Note: It does not matter how many things are possessed/owned; it matters
how many owners there are.

Less Common Situations
Use an apostrophe before an s to show possession if the word is already
plural.
 The women’s organization
 The children’s playground
Use just one apostrophe if both of the nouns in a compound subject
jointly own something.
 Pam and Andy’s family (they share a family)
 The cat and dog’s toys (they share the toys)
Use apostrophes after each of the nouns in a sequence if each noun
individually possesses an item.
 Aliyah’s and Olivia’s report cards were each excellent. (Aliyah and Olivia
 have their own report cards.)
 My sister’s and my brother’s rooms are both messy. (The sister and
 brother individually have messy rooms.)
Note: Do not worry about apostrophe placement exceptions for names
ending in s. The SAT will stick to widely agreed upon apostrophe rules.

 TIP
Another way to keep these rules straight is to realize that if you remove the apostrophe and what
comes after it, you will get the original non-possessive word.



For example:

     Possessive Form                    What to Remove                      Original Word
 Dog’s                             ’s                                 Dog
 Friends’                          ’                                  Friends
 Men’s                             ’s                                 Men


Apostrophes and Pronouns
Do use an apostrophe on pronoun contractions—ones that have a
pronoun and verb together.
 It’s a beautiful day outside. (same as “it is”)
 They’re coming over this evening. (same as “they are”)
 You’re doing well with your homework. (same as “you are”)
Don’t use an apostrophe with pronouns that show possession.
 The bicycle needs its tires inflated. (The tires belong to the bicycle.)
 Their clothes are now clean. (The clothes belong to the implicit people.)
 You should mind your manners at dinner. (The manners belong to you.)
Apostrophe Practice—select the better sentence out of the two options.

  1. (A) One persons’ trash is another person’s treasure.
     (B) One person’s trash is another person’s treasure.

  2. (A) The teachers’ are meeting to share their best lesson ideas.
    (B) The teachers are meeting to share their best lesson ideas.

 3. (A) The natural history museum’s planetarium is extremely
    impressive.
    (B) The natural history museums planetarium is extremely impressive.

 4. (A) Whenever my relatives come over, we need to order extra food.
    (B) Whenever my relatives’ come over, we need to order extra food.

 5. (A) Humpback whales love to swim in the open ocean.
    (B) Humpback whales’ love to swim in the open ocean.

 6. (A) The Broadway show’s sets are difficult to move.
    (B) The Broadway show’s set’s are difficult to move.

 7. (A) When the new coach helped the men’s soccer team, he made
    significant adjustments to the lineup.
    (B) When the new coach helped the mens’ soccer team, he made
    significant adjustments to the lineup.

 8. (A) As you read the joint paper by the scientists, note how Watson’s
    and Crick’s results match their hypothesis.
    (B) As you read the joint paper by the scientists, note how Watson and
    Crick’s results match their hypothesis.

 9. (A) His backpack needs it’s straps repaired.
    (B) His backpack needs its straps repaired.

10. (A) The three farmers’ fields encompassed over 500 acres.
    (B) The three farmers fields encompassed over 500 acres.

  Answers

 1. (B) One person’s trash is another person’s treasure.
    Since it is just one person who possesses the trash, have the
    apostrophe before the s.

 2. (B) The teachers are meeting to share their best lesson ideas.
    No apostrophe is needed since the teachers are not showing
    possession.

 3. (A) The natural history museum’s planetarium is extremely
    impressive.
    The planetarium belongs to the singular museum.

 4. (A) Whenever my relatives come over, we need to order extra food.
    The relatives are doing the action of coming over, not possessing
    anything, so no apostrophe is needed.

 5. (A) Humpback whales love to swim in the open ocean.
    The whales are acting as a subject, not possessing anything, so no
    apostrophe is required.

 6. (A) The Broadway show’s sets are difficult to move.
    The sets belong to the show; the sets do not possess anything.

 7. (A) When the new coach helped the men’s soccer team, he made
    significant adjustments to the lineup.
    Since “men” is already plural, put the apostrophe before the s.

 8. (B) As you read the joint paper by the scientists, note how Watson and
    Crick’s results match their hypothesis.
    Since Watson and Crick collectively own the results, just put an
    apostrophe before the s in the final name.

 9. (B) His backpack needs its straps repaired.
    Show possession with the pronoun “it” by not using the apostrophe.

10. (A) The three farmers’ fields encompassed over 500 acres.
    Three farmers collectively own the fields, so show possession by
    putting an apostrophe after the s.

Parentheses
Parentheses () do not affect the grammar and meaning of the
surrounding sentence.

          Without Parentheses                                  With Parentheses
 Once I finish the test, I will read my book for   Once I finish the test (it should take about 30
 fun.                                              minutes), I will read my book for fun.
 Your next-door neighbor is really nice.           Your next-door neighbor (the one with the
                                                   unusual mailbox) is really nice.
 My teacher gave everyone the opportunity to       My teacher gave everyone the opportunity to
 earn extra credit after the difficult test.       earn extra credit after the difficult test (only a
                                                   handful of students took advantage of it).


In all the above examples, the parentheses do not affect the usage of the
commas and periods that surround them.

Parentheses Practice—select the better sentence out of the two options.

 1. (A) The large dog eats quite a bit of food each day (mainly food from a
    bag).
    (B) The large dog eats quite a bit of food each day (mainly food from a
    bag.)

 2. (A) When you eat breakfast (considered the most important meal of
    the day,) you have energy for several hours.
    (B) When you eat breakfast (considered the most important meal of the
    day), you have energy for several hours.

 3. (A) Cricket (once an Olympic game,) is one of my favorite sports.
    (B) Cricket (once an Olympic game) is one of my favorite sports.

   Answers

 1. (A) The large dog eats quite a bit of food each day (mainly food from
    a bag).
    Put the period outside of the parentheses since the parentheses will not
    affect the surrounding punctuation.
 2. (B) When you eat breakfast (considered the most important meal of
    the day), you have energy for several hours.
    Have the comma outside of the parentheses.

 3. (B) Cricket (once an Olympic game) is one of my favorite sports.
    There is no need for a comma within the parentheses since the
    parentheses already provide a needed pause.

Question Marks

Do use a question mark (?) at the end of a sentence that directly asks a
question.
 Why did you bring that toy to school with you?
 What is he planning on doing in the future?
 “Who is knocking at the door?” my father asked.

Don’t use a question mark if the sentence indirectly asks a question.
 I would like to find out who my teacher will be.
 He is excited to find out what happens next in the play.
 The article addresses the central question of whether nature or nurture
 ultimately has a greater impact.
Question Mark Practice—select the better sentence out of the two options.

 1. (A) If you want to do well in class, be sure to ask your teacher
    questions?
    (B) If you want to do well in class, be sure to ask your teacher
    questions.

 2. (A) Where is the nearest subway station.
    (B) Where is the nearest subway station?

 3. (A) While many students are quiet in class, I prefer to ask my teacher
    what I need to know.
    (B) While many students are quiet in class, I prefer to ask my teacher
    what I need to know?
  Answers

 1. (B) If you want to do well in class, be sure to ask your teacher
    questions.
    This is an indirect question, so no question mark is needed.

 2. (B) Where is the nearest subway station?
    This is a direct question, so use a question mark.

 3. (A) While many students are quiet in class, I prefer to ask my teacher
    what I need to know. This is an indirect question, so no question mark
    is needed.

Punctuation Practice Questions
Exercise 1
 1. I recently moved to a new building, and I am not so sure about some of
     the people who live there. ____________________________ quite a
     bit of noise when he walks around.

    Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the
    conventions of Standard English?

    (A) The man who lives in the apartment above me makes
    (B) The man, who lives in the apartment above me makes
    (C) The man, who lives in the apartment above me, makes
    (D) The man who lives in the apartment, above me makes

 2. I spoke to my teacher, and she gave me some good advice. “To do well
     on the SAT, be sure to work on improving several key
     __________________________________ reasoning, and essay
     editing.”

    Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the
    conventions of Standard English?
   (A) skills, reading comprehension, quantitative
   (B) skills: reading comprehension quantitative
   (C) skills—reading comprehension, quantitative
   (D) skills; reading comprehension, quantitative

3. The weather is lovely—there is a gentle breeze, mild temperature, and
   no precipitation. _____ a great afternoon to read a book for pleasure.

   Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the
   conventions of Standard English?

   (A) Its
   (B) It’s
   (C) Its’
   (D) It

4. The area of the park for adults had a botanical garden, a koi pond, and
   several artistic rock formations. The _______ playground, on the other
   hand, had some enormous slides and swings.

   Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the
   conventions of Standard English?

   (A) children’s
   (B) childrens’
   (C) childrens
   (D) childs’

5. My history teacher brings history to ____________ activities, guest
   speakers, and discussions about controversial topics. It is truly
   exciting to be a part of her class.

   Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the
   conventions of Standard English?

   (A) life with stimulating,
   (B) life with: stimulating
   (C) life with; stimulating
   (D) life with stimulating

6. I came to an important realization as I worried about saving enough
    money for the future. Some of the best things in
    ___________________________ completely free.

   Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the
   conventions of Standard English?

   (A) life, sunshine, fresh air, and starlit nights are
   (B) life—sunshine, fresh air, and starlit nights—are
   (C) life (sunshine, fresh air, and starlit nights—are
   (D) life—sunshine, fresh air, and starlit nights, are

7. When you go shopping, please buy sugar, flour, and butter at the
   grocery; antacids, bandages, and a thermometer at the ___________
   screwdriver, and some sandpaper from the hardware store. Please
   come back with whatever change remains.

   Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the
   conventions of Standard English?

   (A) pharmacy, and a hammer, a
   (B) pharmacy: and a hammer a
   (C) pharmacy, and a hammer a
   (D) pharmacy; and a hammer, a

8. As the human resources officer was immersed in making changes to
   the employee ________ neglected to enforce the policies already on
   the books. Ultimately, he was not very effective in his job.

   Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the
   conventions of Standard English?
     (A) manual, he
     (B) manual he
     (C) manual. He
     (D) manual; he

 9. While surfing the Internet, John found that _______________ been
    found in a nearby city. He was overjoyed to know that his companion
    of many years was safe and sound.

     Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the
     conventions of Standard English?

     (A) Sprinkles his missing pet cat, had
     (B) Sprinkles, his missing pet cat, had
     (C) Sprinkles, his missing pet cat had
     (D) Sprinkles his missing pet cat had

10. Mitchell wrote an excellent ________ had it published in a journal. His
     family members were thrilled that the talents he had worked so long to
     fine-tune were at last being recognized by the public.

     Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the
     conventions of Standard English?

     (A) poem; he
     (B) poem, he
     (C) poem he
     (D) poem, he,

Answer Explanations

 1. (A) It is not just any man but specifically the man who lives in the
     apartment above the narrator who makes noise. Since this description
     is essential to identifying the subject of the second sentence, there is
     no need for any commas to break this up.
2. (C) The dash provides a heavy pause before the list of the skills, each
    of which is separated by a comma. Choice (A) does not have a strong
    enough punctuation, like a colon or dash, before the list. Choice (B)
    does not have a comma separating the first and second items in the
    list. Choice (D) incorrectly uses a semicolon because what follows
    the semicolon is not a complete sentence.

3. (B) “It’s” the contraction for “it is,” making it the correct choice. “Its”
    shows possession, “its’” is always incorrect, and “it” does not have
    the needed verb.

4. (A) With a word like “children” that is already plural, you can show
   possession by adding an apostrophe and an “s.” Choices (B) and (C)
   would not correctly demonstrate possession, and (D) uses the incorrect
   plural version of “child.”

5. (D) The other options provide unnecessary breaks, while choice (D)
   allows the phrase to properly flow.

6. (B) When setting aside a parenthetical phrase, it is necessary to use
   the same punctuation to start and finish the parenthetical phrase.
   Choices (C) and (D) mix and match the beginning and ending
   punctuation, and choice (A) does not have punctuation after the end of
   the parenthetical phrase. Only choice (B) begins and ends the
   parenthetical phrase with consistent punctuation.

7. (D) This option correctly uses a semicolon to separate the three sets of
   listed items, each of which has commas within the list. The semicolon
   is used in this way to help avoid confusion about the separation of
   listed items, which would result if commas were used in this situation.

8. (A) This option correctly separates the dependent introductory clause
   from the independent clause with a comma. Choice (B) has no
   separation. Choices (C) and (D) would have to have a complete
   sentence before the punctuation to be correct.
 9. (B) This option puts the clarification of the identity of “Sprinkles” off
    to the side by surrounding it with commas. The other options do not
    separate this phrase from the rest of the sentence.

10. (A) The semicolon separates the two independent clauses from one
    another. A comma is insufficient when used without a conjunction to
    separate two independent clauses.

Exercise 2
 1. The interconnectedness between mental and physical health has been
    consistently shown in a variety of fields in research. _________
    causes relatively minor physical ailments like headaches, digestive
    issues, and muscle tension.

     Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the
     conventions of Standard English?

     (A) In the short term mental stress, typically
     (B) In the short term, mental stress typically
     (C) In the short term; mental stress typically
     (D) In the short term, mental stress, typically

 2. The most remarkable fact in connection with the season was the earlier
    _________ greatly delayed arrival. This was probably due almost
    entirely to the unusual weather conditions that seemed to prevail
    throughout the South during March and early April, affecting the
    migration of these birds.

     Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the
     conventions of Standard English?

     (A) migrant’s,
     (B) migrant’s,
     (C) migrant
     (D) migrants’
3. A parasitic relationship is between two __________ of the organisms
   benefits while the other is harmed. Parasitic relationships are often
   associated with internal parasites like worms or some species of mites,
   but parasitic relationships are not limited to organisms residing within
   a host.

   Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the
   conventions of Standard English?

   (A) organisms, one
   (B) organisms—one
   (C) organisms, while one
   (D) organisms. If one

4. With health care professionals more needed than ever, hospitals and
   universities are working to attract students to their health care
   programs. Students often head into either a nursing or premed track
   without _____________ there are many more jobs in healing beyond
   (or better yet, between) those two positions.

   Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the
   conventions of Standard English?

   (A) realizing however that
   (B) realizing however, that
   (C) realizing, however, that
   (D) realizing; however that

5. Whether they like it or dislike it, most Americans are familiar with the
   concept of a _____________ in to save a large company that is
   floundering. The government does this primarily to try to save the
   economy from potentially crushing bankruptcies of giant corporations
   that employ thousands of people.

   Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the
   conventions of Standard English?
   (A) government bailout: the government swoops
   (B) government bailout, the government swoops
   (C) government; bailout the government swoops
   (D) government bailout the government—swoops

6. Good health care practitioners should be able to find work in nearly
   any corner of the United _______________ pay in less desirable
   regions like rural areas and other underserved communities.

   Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the
   conventions of Standard English?

   (A) States, moreover, they can earn higher
   (B) States: moreover they can earn higher
   (C) States, moreover they can earn higher
   (D) States; moreover, they can earn higher

7. The amount of time spent in making observations during the past
   _____________ Observations were typically made independently by
   each of the writers and on lands differing somewhat in general
   character.

   Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the
   conventions of Standard English?

   (A) season, is significant.
   (B) season is significant.
   (C) season is, significant.
   (D) season—is significant.

8. The migration of birds at Raleigh, N.C., during the spring of 1915 was
   so unusual that it is believed that a short ____________ be of interest
   to the readers of Bird-Lore.

   Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the
   conventions of Standard English?
     (A) account, together with a list of the records, will
     (B) account, together with a list of the records will
     (C) account—together with a list of the records, will
     (D) account together with a list of the records; will

 9. Upon hatching, a baby European cuckoo’s first instinct is to empty the
    nest. _______ back is perfectly shaped to scoop up other eggs and
    eject them from the nest.

     Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the
     conventions of Standard English?

     (A) Its’
     (B) Its
     (C) It’s
     (D) It is

10. Like the mental benefits, and thus physical benefits, that have been
     found from living in close-knit ____________ are many activities that
     are known to promote physical health due to their impact on mental
     health.

     Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the
     conventions of Standard English?

     (A) communities, there
     (B) communities there
     (C) communities; there
     (D) communities: there

Answer Explanations
 1. (B) This option correctly places a comma after the introductory
    phrase, separating the dependent clause from the independent clause
    that follows. Choice (A) would interrupt the independent clause,
    separating its subject, “mental stress,” from the remainder of the
   sentence. Choice (C) incorrectly uses a semicolon after a dependent
   clause—a semicolon must have an independent clause on either side
   of it. Choice (D) has too many commas.

2. (D) Based on the context in the second sentence, there are multiple
   birds that are migrating. So, show possession of the “arrival” by
   putting the apostrophe after “migrants.” It is not choice (A) or (B)
   since there are multiple migrants, and it is not choice (C) because this
   does not show possession.

3. (B) Use a dash before the clarification of the relationship between the
   two organisms since it provides a heavy pause. Choice (A) is a comma
   splice. Choice (C) incorrectly uses “while” to show a contrast. Choice
   (D) would result in a sentence fragment for the second part.

4. (C) The transitional word “however” should be surrounded with
   commas since the sentence would still be logical if this word were
   removed. Choices (A) and (B) do not have enough commas, and
   choice (D) incorrectly uses a semicolon since there is not a complete
   sentence after the semicolon. Moreover, there is no comma after
   “however” in choice (D).

5. (A) The colon is appropriate in this case because there is a complete
   sentence before it and a clarification after it. Choice (B) would result
   in a comma splice. Choice (C) would not have a complete and logical
   sentence after the semicolon, and choice (D) has a pause at an
   awkward spot.

6. (D) When joining two sentences with a conjunctive adverb like
   “moreover,” you need a semicolon before the adverb and a comma
   after. Choice (D) is the only option that joins these sentences in this
   way.

7. (B) Do not separate the subject “the amount of time spent in making
   observations during the past season” from the verb “is.” All the other
   options give an unnecessary pause.
 8. (A) Surround the parenthetical phrase, “together with a list of the
    records,” with commas. Choice (B) only begins the parenthetical
    phrase with a comma, but does not have one at the end. Choice (C) is
    inconsistent in how it starts and finishes the parenthetical punctuation.
    And choice (D) incorrectly uses a semicolon when no complete
    sentence follows it.

 9. (B) “Its” is the correct form of the possessive for the bird’s back.
    Choice (A) would never be correct, and choices (C) and (D) would
    signify “it is” instead of the possessive.

10. (A) A comma will correctly separate the long dependent clause from
    the independent clause that follows. Choice (B) provides no pause,
    and choices (C) and (D) would need a complete sentence preceding
    their punctuation.

Sentence Structure and Organization
Parallelism
Even though the meaning of a sentence may be clear, unless it is written in
a way that has stylistic consistency, it will not flow how it should. Have
stylistic consistency by looking out for parallel structure.

   Example 1

Incorrect: Two of my hobbies are riding bicycles and to watch movies.

Correct: Two of my hobbies are riding bicycles and watching movies.

Explanation: Maintain the same way of describing the hobbies so that the
sentence has a parallel structure.

   Example 2

Incorrect: Covered in mud, leaves, and in grass, he really needed a shower.
Correct: Covered in mud, leaves, and grass, he really needed a shower.

Explanation: If all the items in the list started with “in,” then it would be
fine to maintain that phrasing. Since the “in” that goes with “mud” also
goes with “leaves,” it can also apply to “grass” so there is no need to have
“in” again.

Parallelism Practice—select the better sentence out of the two options.

 1. (A) Choose a teacher to write your letter of recommendation who
    knows you well, likes the work you have done, and has the time to do
    a good job.
    (B) Choose a teacher to write your letter of recommendation who
    knows you well, likes the work you have done, and time to do a good
    job.

 2. (A) To win or losing is not really important—just enjoy the game.
    (B) Winning or losing is not really important—just enjoy the game.

 3. (A) Neither the children nor the adults were ready to leave the
    amusement park.
    (B) Neither the children or those who were adults were ready to leave
    the amusement park.

 4. (A) To get the most out of class, listen carefully, write detailed notes,
    and ask pointed questions.
    (B) To get the most out of class, listen carefully, write detailed notes,
    and asking pointed questions.

 5. (A) Dressed in tuxedos, ballgowns, and additionally in jewels, the
    celebrities were ready for the awards banquet.
    (B) Dressed in tuxedos, ballgowns, and jewels, the celebrities were
    ready for the awards banquet.

 6. (A) Having a diversified portfolio, including investments in domestic
    growth stocks and international items, is a sound financial strategy.
    (B) Having a diversified portfolio, including investments in domestic
    growth stocks and international value stocks, is a sound financial
    strategy.

 7. (A) Ben, a country music lover, and Kim, an appreciator of the musical
    genre of classical, surprisingly found a radio station they both liked.
    (B) Ben, a country music lover, and Kim, a classical music lover,
    surprisingly found a radio station they both liked.

 8. (A) Be sure to pack these items for the bus trip: delicious snacks,
    entertaining movies, and good books.
    (B) Be sure to pack these items for the bus trip: delicious snacks,
    movies that you find entertaining, and good books.

 9. (A) To clean his apartment, Henry vacuumed the floor and dusting the
    shelves.
    (B) To clean his apartment, Henry vacuumed the floor and dusted the
    shelves.

10. (A) My brother, a football fan, and my sister, a baseball fan, both enjoy
    watching sports in autumn.
    (B) My brother, a football fan, and my sister, who is a baseball fan,
    both enjoy watching sports in autumn.

  Answers

 1. (A) Choose a teacher to write your letter of recommendation who
    knows you well, likes the work you have done, and has the time to do
    a good job.
    Use “has the” with the final item in the list since all the listed items
    begin with a verb.

 2. (B) Winning or losing is not really important—just enjoy the game.
    “Winning” and “losing” use the same phrasing.

 3. (A) Neither the children nor the adults were ready to leave the
    amusement park.
     “Neither” and “nor” go together, while “either” and “or” go together.

 4. (A) To get the most out of class, listen carefully, write detailed notes,
    and ask pointed questions.
    “Asking” is not parallel with the other verbs.

 5. (B) Dressed in tuxedos, ballgowns, and jewels, the celebrities were
    ready for the awards banquet.
    Using “additionally in” interrupts the parallel structure.

 6. (B) Having a diversified portfolio, including investments in domestic
    growth stocks and international value stocks, is a sound financial
    strategy.
    “International items” does not match the previous example of
    “domestic growth stocks.”

 7. (B) Ben, a country music lover, and Kim, a classical music lover,
    surprisingly found a radio station they both liked.
    Simply using “lover” is sufficient and maintains the parallel structure.

 8. (A) Be sure to pack these items for the bus trip: delicious snacks,
    entertaining movies, and good books.
    Maintain the parallel listing structure of adjective-noun by saying
    “entertaining movies.”

 9. (B) To clean his apartment, Henry vacuumed the floor and dusted the
    shelves.
    “Vacuumed” and “dusted” maintain a parallel style.

10. (A) My brother, a football fan, and my sister, a baseball fan, both
    enjoy watching sports in autumn.
    Since the first parenthetical in the list does not have “who is,”
    maintain that style for the next parenthetical.

Modifier Placement
Make sure sentences follow a logical order, with descriptions and subjects
in a clear sequence.
Be certain that the literal meaning matches up with the intended meaning.

   Example 1

Incorrect: After completing the long hike, a three-hour nap did Xavier take.

Correct: After completing the long hike, Xavier took a three-hour nap.

Explanation: The first sentence does not name the subject until the very
end, making it difficult to follow. The second sentence makes it clear that
Xavier took the hike.

   Example 2

Incorrect: Once we left the stadium, traffic was directed.

Correct: Once we left the stadium, the police directed the traffic.

Explanation: The first sentence is vague as to who or what directed the
traffic. The second sentence makes it clear that the police did so.

   Example 3

Incorrect: Your book will not become damaged, covered with a brown
paper book cover.

Correct: Your book, covered with a brown paper book cover, will not
become damaged.

Explanation: The description of the book—that it is covered with a brown
paper book cover—should come after the book, as the second sentence
does.

Modifier Placement Practice—select the better sentence out of the two
options.
1. (A) I helped when dinner was over to clear the table.
   (B) When dinner was over, I helped to clear the table.

2. (A) The deer encountered a bear eating grass in the meadow.
   (B) While eating grass in the meadow, the deer encountered a bear.

3. (A) My friend Jordan, an art aficionado, loves to go to the latest
   museum openings.
   (B) My friend Jordan loves to go to the latest museum openings, an art
   aficionado.

4. (A) Widely embraced as an ethical practice, recycling is required in
   many municipalities.
   (B) Recycling is required in many municipalities, widely embraced as
   an ethical practice.

5. (A) The 1960s (a decade of much social upheaval) made my relatives
   the people they are today.
   (B) The 1960s made my relatives the people (a decade of much social
   upheaval) they are today.

6. (A) My classmate is very generous when I forget my own, always
   shares his extra pencils and erasers with me.
   (B) My classmate is very generous, since he always shares his extra
   pencils and erasers with me when I forget my own.

7. (A) Despite my reservations about going on the trip, I ended up having
   a wonderful time.
   (B) I ended, despite my reservations about going on the trip, up having
   a wonderful time.

8. (A) Astrophysicists, a mysterious force in the universe, are excited to
   discover the true identity of dark energy.
   (B) Astrophysicists are excited to discover the true identity of dark
   energy, a mysterious force in the universe.

9. (A) The diameter of a circle goes through the center of the circle,
   which is twice the circle’s radius.
    (B) The diameter of a circle, which is twice the circle’s radius, goes
    through the center of the circle.

10. (A) Even though they were delicious, the habanero peppers were so
    spicy they hurt my eyes.
    (B) The habanero peppers were so spicy they hurt my eyes, even
    though they were delicious.

  Answers

 1. (B) When dinner was over, I helped to clear the table.
    This makes it clear that the narrator helped with clearing the table
    after dinner was over.

 2. (B) While eating grass in the meadow, the deer encountered a bear.
    This makes it clear that it is the deer that is eating grass, not the bear.

 3. (A) My friend Jordan, an art aficionado, loves to go to the latest
    museum openings.
    Jordan, not the museum openings, is the art aficionado (someone who
    appreciates art).

 4. (A) Widely embraced as an ethical practice, recycling is required in
    many municipalities.
    The ethical practice is recycling, not municipalities.

 5. (A) The 1960s (a decade of much social upheaval) made my relatives
    the people they are today.
    The 1960s, not the people, were the decade of much social upheaval.

 6. (B) My classmate is very generous, since he always shares his extra
    pencils and erasers with me when I forget my own.
    This sentence makes sense, putting the reason the classmate is
    generous immediately after stating that he is generous, and making the
    subject “he” clear in the later part of the sentence.
 7. (A) Despite my reservations about going on the trip, I ended up
    having a wonderful time.
    The other option breaks up the phrase “I ended up,” making the
    sentence confusing.

 8. (B) Astrophysicists are excited to discover the true identity of dark
    energy, a mysterious force in the universe.
    Dark energy, not astrophysicists, can logically be described as a
    mysterious force in the universe.

 9. (B) The diameter of a circle, which is twice the circle’s radius, goes
    through the center of the circle.
    This makes it clear that the diameter is twice the circle’s radius, not
    that the circle is twice its own radius.

10. (A) Even though they were delicious, the habanero peppers were so
    spicy they hurt my eyes.
    The habanero peppers were delicious, not the narrator’s eyes.

Logical Comparisons
When making comparisons, be sure that the things being compared match
one another in their type and number. As with other sentence structure and
organization ideas, be sure that the intended meaning corresponds to the
literal meaning.

   Example 1

Incorrect: The salaries at the first business are comparable to the other
business.

Correct: The salaries at the first business are comparable to those of the
other business.

Explanation: The salaries, not the businesses, are what are being compared.
Putting “those of” in the second part of the sentence makes this clear.
  Example 2

Incorrect: Pollen affects me the same way that ragweed.

Correct: Pollen affects me the same way that ragweed does.

Explanation: The ways that pollen and ragweed affect the narrator are what
are being compared. Without putting “does” at the end, the sentence would
compare “pollen affects” to the noun “ragweed.”

Logical Comparisons Practice—select the better sentence out of the two
options.

 1. (A) The downtown park in my city is better than any park.
    (B) The downtown park in my city is better than any other park.

 2. (A) Your assignment is better than him.
    (B) Your assignment is better than his.

 3. (A) The principal at my middle school was tougher than the one at my
    elementary school.
    (B) The principal at my middle school was tougher than my
    elementary school.

 4. (A) I hope that my job application is better than the other applicants.
    (B) I hope that my job application is better than the other applicants’.

 5. (A) Nurse practitioners provide many of the same treatments that
    doctors.
    (B) Nurse practitioners provide many of the same treatments that
    doctors provide.

 6. (A) I was disappointed to learn that students who did less work in the
    class earned better grades than students who put in more effort.
    (B) I was disappointed to learn that students who did less work in the
    class earned better grades than students of effort.
 7. (A) Relative to the collection of my local town’s art museum, that of
    the Louvre is far more impressive.
    (B) Relative to the collection of my local town’s art museum, the
    Louvre is far more impressive.

 8. (A) Algebra is better understood as a study of mathematical principles
    than simply studying letters.
    (B) Algebra is better understood as a study of mathematical principles
    than simply a study of letters.

 9. (A) A general is typically more experienced than a lieutenant.
    (B) A general is typically more experienced than a lieutenant does.

10. (A) I find walking far easier than running.
    (B) I find walking far easier than the times in which I run.

  Answers

 1. (B) The downtown park in my city is better than any other park.
    Without the “other,” the sentence would be comparing the downtown
    park to itself.

 2. (B) Your assignment is better than his.
    Compare the assignment to another assignment, not to a person.

 3. (A) The principal at my middle school was tougher than the one at my
    elementary school. Compare the principal to another principal, not to a
    school.

 4. (B) I hope that my job application is better than the other applicants’.
    Using the apostrophe at the end of “applicants” makes the word a
    substitute for the “applications of other applicants,” giving us a logical
    comparison.

 5. (B) Nurse practitioners provide many of the same treatments that
    doctors provide.
    Compare the providing of the nurse practitioners to the providing of
    the doctors, not the doctors themselves.

 6. (A) I was disappointed to learn that students who did less work in the
    class earned better grades than students who put in more effort.
    Keep the phrasing of “who did less work” consistent by using the verb
    “put in.”

 7. (A) Relative to the collection of my local town’s art museum, that of
    the Louvre is far more impressive.
    “That of” provides a stand-in for the collection of the Louvre, so that
    you are comparing a collection of one museum to the collection of the
    other.

 8. (B) Algebra is better understood as a study of mathematical principles
    than simply a study of letters.
    “A study of” is consistent with the earlier phrasing, not “studying.”

 9. (A) A general is typically more experienced than a lieutenant.
    The general is described with the adjective “experienced,” and there is
    no need to use a verb like “does.”

10. (A) I find walking far easier than running.
    This comparison concisely maintains the style, ending in “ing.” The
    other option is overly wordy and confusing.

Sentence Structure and Organization Practice Questions
 1. Michael Jordan, winner of six World Championships, is
    ____________. It is incredible that Jordan accumulated so many titles
    despite taking a hiatus from basketball for several years to pursue his
    interest in baseball.

    Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the
    conventions of Standard English?
    (A) as a basketball player who is incredible that is universally
         regarded.
    (B) regarded as a basketball player universally and incredibly.
    (C) universally regarded as an incredible basketball player.
    (D) as is universally regarded a basketball player with incredible
         qualities.

2. The playoff match was not even close—the Tigers walloped the Lions
   by 20 points. Undoubtedly, the coach of the Tigers is better than
   ____________

    Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the
    conventions of Standard English?

    (A) the Lions.
    (B) the coach of the Lions.
    (C) theirs.
    (D) the other team.

3. The restaurant was very serene, with only a handful of diners present.
   _____________________ He took advantage of the quiet to think
   about his plans for the future.

    Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the
    conventions of Standard English?

    (A) My friend, chewing quietly, pensively enjoyed his dinner.
    (B) My friend pensively enjoyed his dinner chewing quietly.
    (C) My friend enjoyed his chewing quietly dinner pensively.
    (D) Chewing quietly, his dinner my friend pensively enjoyed.

4. In the adventure movie, they ran through the forest, fought fierce
    predators, and _______ the evil villains. I rated the film five stars for
    excitement but only three stars for the dialogue.
   Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the
   conventions of Standard English?

   (A) stop
   (B) stopping
   (C) will stop
   (D) stopped

5. In the gym, on the field, __________ Hannah acted like a true
    champion. Her diligence and strength served as an excellent example
    for both her classmates and teammates.

   Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the
   conventions of Standard English?

   (A) and the classroom,
   (B) and in the classroom,
   (C) and classroom,
   (D) and classroom as well,

6. The forecasts throughout the week predicted, high winds, heavy
   precipitation, and freezing temperatures. However, the weather ended
   up being fine; it _________ hailed. We were immensely relieved.

   Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the
   conventions of Standard English?

   (A) either snowed nor
   (B) either snowed and
   (C) neither snowed and
   (D) neither snowed nor

7. Out of everyone in my city, I am _______ at solving crossword
   puzzles. My friend, on the other hand, is widely recognized as the best
   chess player in town.
   Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the
   conventions of Standard English?

   (A) good
   (B) better
   (C) the best
   (D) the goodest

8. Upon receiving the notice of losing his job, ________ He took all of
   his belongings with him in a small box so that the next employee
   could use his cubicle.

   Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the
   conventions of Standard English?

   (A) his desk was cleared out by him.
   (B) he cleared out his desk.
   (C) the desk cleared.
   (D) the desk was cleared.

9. The brand-new _________ Give the affordable price, I decided to buy
   the extended warranty and an advanced headset.

   Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the
   conventions of Standard English?

   (A) phone, which cost only $30, was covered under the cell phone
       plan I found online.
   (B) phone was covered under the cell phone plan I found online,
       which cost only $30.
   (C) phone that cost only $30 was under the cell phone plan covered,
       that is, the one I found online.
   (D) phone which cost only $30 was online under the cell phone I
       found covered.
10. I find that driving the sports car is both exhilarating _________ My
     friends enjoy going for rides with me, especially when I retract the
     roof and turn the car into a convertible.

     Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the
     conventions of Standard English?

     (A) and relaxed.
     (B) and relaxing.
     (C) or relaxing.
     (D) or relaxed.

Answer Explanations

 1. (C) This option puts the words in the most logical sequence. The other
    options put the words in sequences that are not very clear.

 2. (B) By replacing the underlined portion with “the coach of the Lions,”
    the sentence will now make a logical comparison of a coach to a
    coach. The other options compare the coach to illogical entities.

 3. (A) Choice (A) is the only option that correctly has “chewing quietly”
    next to what it should modify—“My friend.” The other options put
    this phrase in an awkward spot.

 4. (D) “Stopped” is the only option that maintains the parallel structure
    by having a past tense verb. It is consistent with the other verbs “ran”
    and “fought.” The other choices do not maintain parallelism.

 5. (B) The other phrases in this sentence start with a preposition like “in”
    or “on.” Choice (B) is the only option that begins in that similar
    fashion.

 6. (D) Based on the preceding sentence and the transition “however,”
    this sentence needs to say that no bad weather happened. “Neither . . .
    nor” is the appropriate way to express this idea. With “either” and
    “neither,” use “or” not “and.”
 7. (C) Since there are surely three or more people in the city, the
    superlative “best” is the correct word to express this comparison.
    “Good” is typically used to describe a single object, “better” is used
    for comparing two objects, and “goodest” is not a word.

 8. (B) This option puts the sentence in an active voice and has the words
    in a logical order. Choices (A) and (D) invert the word order and
    choice (C) would not make sense since the desk is not doing the
    clearing.

 9. (A) The phrase “which cost only $30” is nonessential to the sentence
    and can be surrounded with commas. Moreover, the phrase needs to
    modify “phone” since that is the item that has the cost of $30. Choice
    (A) is the only option that does both tasks.

10. (B) This maintains parallelism with “exhilarating” by having the same
    ending of “ing.” Also, with the word “both,” you need to use “and”
    instead of “or.”

Transitions
The SAT tests your proficiency with transitional words—words like “but,”
“also,” and “because” that connect phrases and sentences together. An
understanding of transitional words will ensure that your writing is well-
organized. Here is a list of some of the most common transitional words
you will encounter on the SAT:

  General Meaning                              Transitional Words
 Additional Information   Also, and, besides, further, furthermore, in addition, what’s more
 Cause and Effect         As a result, because, consequently, therefore, thus, to that end
 Clarification            At any rate, in other words, in fact
 Comparison               Likewise, similarly, by the same token
 Contrast                 After all, alternately, although, but, by contrast, even though,
                          however, instead, meanwhile, nevertheless, nonetheless, on the
                          other hand, rather, still, whereas
 Give an Example          For example, for instance
 Obviously              Of course
 Time Sequence          Eventually, finally, in the first place, next, ultimately
 Typically              Traditionally


   Example 1

Incorrect: The kitchen had virtually no food in it. Also, we managed to
make dinner.

Correct: The kitchen had virtually no food in it. Still, we managed to make
dinner.

Explanation: Even though the kitchen did not have much food, the group
was still able to make dinner. Thus, a contrast is needed between the two
sentences—“Still” works well. When working through transition questions,
be certain to consider the surrounding context so you can determine the best
logical relationship.

In the above example, you needed to look at the sentence before and after
the transitional word. In some sentences, the transition is based just on what
comes after the transitional word, like “Although I was excited to watch the
movie, I had difficulty finding time to do so.” Err on the side of considering
a bit too much context just to be sure you fully understand what logical
relationship is needed.

   Example 2

      When school begins in the fall, seniors often ask their past teachers to
      write letters of recommendation on their behalf. The best teachers are
      typically inundated with requests, and usually have to limit the
      number of letters they can write. _________ it is a good idea to ask
      teachers in the spring or summer for letters of recommendation so that
      the teachers have adequate time to do them.

      Which choice completes the text with the most logical transition?
     (A) Also,
     (B) For instance,
     (C) Therefore,
     (D) Furthermore,

Explanation: The correct answer to this question is (C), “Therefore.” This is
the only option that provides a cause-and-effect relationship between the
first two sentences and the final sentence of the paragraph. A cause-and-
effect relationship is necessary here since it is because good teachers are
flooded with letter of recommendation requests that it is sensible to ask
teachers earlier to write letters on your behalf.

Transitions Practice—select the better sentence(s) out of the two options.

 1. (A) Even though I had plenty of sleep, I still felt tired.
    (B) Consequently I had plenty of sleep, I still felt tired.

 2. (A) A part-time job during high school is a great way to make extra
    money. Furthermore, it can help you develop skills that will serve you
    well in college and in your career.
    (B) A part-time job during high school is a great way to make extra
    money. In contrast, it can help you develop skills that will serve you
    well in college and in your career.

 3. (A) When making bread, first preheat the oven. Therefore, put the
    well-kneaded dough into the oven to bake.
    (B) When making bread, first preheat the oven. Next, put the well-
    kneaded dough into the oven to bake.

 4. (A) The yard was completely covered with weeds. Nevertheless, the
    gardener happily tackled the weeding and turned the yard into a
    beautiful site.
    (B) The yard was completely covered with weeds. Also, the gardener
    happily tackled the weeding and turned the yard into a beautiful site.

 5. (A) Majoring in two different areas may allow for a natural synergy
    between subjects. For instance, a business major with an engineering
    major could help you learn both how to make a product and how to
    market it.
    (B) Majoring in two different areas may allow for a natural synergy
    between subjects. Whereas a business major with an engineering major
    could help you learn both how to make a product and how to market it.

 6. (A) He did not have a good reason to run for office, and, by the same
    token, he did not have a reason to avoid running.
    (B) He did not have a good reason to run for office, and, in the first
    place, he did not have a reason to avoid running.

 7. (A) A perfect score would, of course, be preferable; thus, a 99 out of
    100 is truly excellent.
    (B) A perfect score would, of course, be preferable; however, a 99 out
    of 100 is truly excellent.

 8. (A) We did not do very well in the game; consequently, our coach
    made us run extra laps.
    (B) We did not do very well in the game; and our coach made us run
    extra laps.

 9. (A) The roller coaster had an awesome first hill, and what’s more, it
    had three incredible loops.
    (B) The roller coaster had an awesome first hill and despite this, it had
    three incredible loops.

10. (A) The wildlife sanctuary had elephants and rhinos. In contrast, it had
    zebra, giraffes, and water buffalo.
    (B) The wildlife sanctuary had elephants and rhinos. Further, it had
    zebra, giraffes, and water buffalo.

11. (A) His anger at his neighbor was understandable. Therefore, it was no
    justification for vandalism of his neighbor’s house.
    (B) His anger at his neighbor was understandable. However, it was no
    justification for vandalism of his neighbor’s house.
12. (A) The world-renowned orchestra conductor is nonetheless an
    excellent violinist.
    (B) The world-renowned orchestra conductor is likewise an excellent
    violinist.

13. (A) I did not eat breakfast. As a result, I was really hungry for lunch.
    (B) I did not eat breakfast. Moreover, I was really hungry for lunch.

14. (A) Thanksgiving is, in other words, a day on which people eat quite a
    bit of food.
    (B) Thanksgiving is traditionally a day on which people eat quite a bit
    of food.

15. (A) Her parents did not think she wanted to join the club. In fact, she
    was the first one to sign up for the club at the school fair.
    (B) Her parents did not think she wanted to join the club. Typically,
    she was the first one to sign up for the club at the school fair.

16. (A) Best friends are forever; despite this, you will stay connected to
    your best friend over many decades and great distances.
    (B) Best friends are forever; in other words, you will stay connected to
    your best friend over many decades and great distances.

17. (A) At first, the athlete resisted the advice of his coach. Ultimately, he
    took the coach’s advice and improved immensely.
    (B) Initially, the athlete resisted the advice of his coach. At first, he
    took the coach’s advice and improved immensely.

18. (A) I am excited for the first day of school. On the other hand, I am
    worried about a pop quiz over the summer reading.
    (B) I am excited for the first day of school. Consequently, I am worried
    about a pop quiz over the summer reading.

19. (A) We climbed up the mountain and still reached the summit.
    (B) We climbed up the mountain and eventually reached the summit.

20. (A) The doctor said you should eat more fruits and vegetables.
    Therefore, you should come to the farmer’s market to buy some
   healthy produce.
   (B) The doctor said you should eat more fruits and vegetables.
   Whereas you should come to the farmer’s market to buy some healthy
   produce.

 Answers

1. (A) Even though I had plenty of sleep, I still felt tired.
   “Even though” shows contrast between having plenty of sleep and still
   feeling tired.

2. (A) A part-time job during high school is a great way to make extra
   money. Furthermore, it can help you develop skills that will serve you
   well in college and in your career.
   “Furthermore” makes sense since the idea of skill development would
   be an additional benefit of having a part-time job.

3. (B) When making bread, first preheat the oven. Next, put the well-
   kneaded dough into the oven to bake.
   “Next” demonstrates the sequence of events that one would find in a
   recipe.

4. (A) The yard was completely covered with weeds. Nevertheless, the
   gardener happily tackled the weeding and turned the yard into a
   beautiful site.
   “Nevertheless” shows a contrast between the fact that the yard was
   covered with weeds and the fact that the gardener could still make the
   yard into something beautiful.

5. (A) Majoring in two different areas may allow for a natural synergy
   between subjects. For instance, a business major with an engineering
   major could help you learn both how to make a product and how to
   market it.
   “For instance” is a logical way to join the two sentences, since the
   second sentence provides an example of how a double major could
   make sense.
 6. (A) He did not have a good reason to run for office, and, by the same
    token, he did not have a reason to avoid running.
    “By the same token” means that the man both had a good reason to
    run for office and had a reason not to run.

 7. (B) A perfect score would, of course, be preferable; however, a 99 out
    of 100 is truly excellent.
    “However” shows a contrast between the acknowledgement that a
    perfect score would be better, but that a 99 is still outstanding.

 8. (A) We did not do very well in the game; consequently, our coach
    made us run extra laps.
    “Consequently” states the cause-and-effect relationship between not
    doing well in the game and the coach’s decision to make the players
    run laps.

 9. (A) The roller coaster had an awesome first hill, and what’s more, it
    had three incredible loops.
    “What’s more” shows that in addition to the awesome first hill, the
    roller coast had three incredible loops.

10. (B) The wildlife sanctuary had elephants and rhinos. Further, it had
    zebra, giraffes, and water buffalo.
    “Further” shows that along with the elephants and rhinos, the
    sanctuary also had other animals.

11. (B) His anger at his neighbor was understandable. However, it was no
    justification for vandalism of his neighbor’s house.
    “However” shows that while the man was understandably angry at his
    neighbor, he had no good reason to vandalize his neighbor’s home.

12. (B) The world-renowned orchestra conductor is likewise an excellent
    violinist.
    “Likewise” shows that the conductor is both excellent with the
    orchestra and with the piano.

13. (A) I did not eat breakfast. As a result, I was really hungry for lunch.
     “As a result” shows a direct cause-and-effect relationship between not
     eating breakfast and being hungry for lunch.

14. (B) Thanksgiving is traditionally a day on which people eat quite a bit
    of food.
    “In other words” does not make sense since the sentence is not
    rephrasing anything; “traditionally” works because the sentence says
    what typically happens on this holiday.

15. (A) Her parents did not think she wanted to join the club. In fact, she
    was the first one to sign up for the club at the school fair. “In fact”
    clarifies that despite what her parents thought, the daughter was
    actually interested in joining the club.

16. (B) Best friends are forever; in other words, you will stay connected to
    your best friend over many decades and great distances.
    The part of the sentence after the semicolon clarifies what is meant by
    the statement that “best friends are forever,” so “in other words” is
    logical.

17. (A) At first, the athlete resisted the advice of his coach. Ultimately, he
    took the coach’s advice and improved immensely.
    This sentence puts the sequence of events in a logical order, with the
    athlete initially resisting the coach’s advice and eventually following
    it.

18. (A) I am excited for the first day of school. On the other hand, I am
    worried about a pop quiz over the summer reading.
    “On the other hand” suggests a contrast between the excitement of the
    student and the worry over a quiz.

19. (B) We climbed up the mountain and eventually reached the summit.
    This option shows a logical sequence of events with “eventually” used
    to mark the final part of the journey.

20. (A) The doctor said you should eat more fruits and vegetables.
    Therefore, you should come to the farmer’s market to buy some
    healthy produce. “Therefore” shows a cause-and-effect relationship
    between the doctor’s recommendation about how to eat and the action
    necessary to acquire the recommended foods.

Transitions Practice Questions
Exercise 1
 1. The two friends saw eye to eye on virtually everything, from food to
    fashion, and from literature to music. When one found something to
    be funny, the other was ________ amused.

    Which choice completes the text with the most logical transition?

    (A) likewise
    (B) specifically
    (C) finally
    (D) meanwhile

 2. Electing Maria to be class president was a foregone conclusion. She
    was popular with virtually every group in school. ________ her
    speech made a clear and convincing case for her candidacy.

    Which choice completes the text with the most logical transition?

    (A) Notwithstanding,
    (B) Immediately,
    (C) Although,
    (D) Moreover,

 3. The court proceedings were about to begin without the sole eyewitness
    to the crime present. The judge _______ summoned the eyewitness to
    appear at the next court hearing to help get to the bottom of the matter.

    Which choice completes the text with the most logical transition?

    (A) in contrast
   (B) still
   (C) accordingly
   (D) despite this

4. The play will be delayed for several minutes so that the ushers can
   guide the latecomers to their seats. ________ spectators can spend
   some time checking out the program and enjoying their concessions.

   Which choice completes the text with the most logical transition?

   (A) Centrally,
   (B) In the meantime,
   (C) To summarize,
   (D) Furthermore,

5. The meal looked and smelled a bit strange; _______, it tasted
   delicious. It is often helpful to be open to new experiences, not being
   afraid to take that first bite.

   Which choice completes the text with the most logical transition?

   (A) therefore
   (B) nevertheless
   (C) for this reason
   (D) to that end

6. When you want to chop vegetables, begin by grabbing the ingredients
   you will need. ______, get the cutting board and knife. Finally, begin
   chopping the vegetables into the shapes and sizes you need for the
   dish.

   Which choice completes the text with the most logical transition?

   (A) First
   (B) At last
   (C) In short
   (D) Second

7. As a father, I try to give my children the best advice I can. ________, I
   am no expert in psychology. However, I genuinely believe that I have
   my children’s best interests at heart and want to help however
   possible.

   Which choice completes the text with the most logical transition?

   (A) Granted
   (B) Similarly
   (C) Beyond
   (D) Foundationally

8. The squirrel grabbed a large walnut and took it up a tree for storage.
   Only a few minutes ______ the squirrel returned to grab yet another
   walnut. With dedication like this, the squirrel should be in excellent
   shape for a long winter.

   Which choice completes the text with the most logical transition?

   (A) afterward
   (B) beyond
   (C) nevertheless
   (D) therefore

9. The baker wanted to make something that would be acceptable for
   diners with a gluten intolerance. _________ in mind, he found some
   gluten-free flour and made a wonderful dessert.

   Which choice completes the text with the most logical transition?

   (A) Unfortunate
   (B) In fact of purpose
   (C) Truly
   (D) With this object
10. When you write your term paper, be sure to give plenty of examples
    ________ your primary argument. The grader will carefully examine
    how strong the support is for your thesis.

     Which choice completes the text with the most logical transition?

     (A) with contend
     (B) of claiming
     (C) on advance
     (D) to illustrate

Answer Explanations
 1. (A) The two friends are similar in all their beliefs, so the transition
    “likewise” expresses this similarity.

 2. (D) Maria is popular with everyone and in addition her speech was
    very convincing. The most appropriate transition is “moreover” since
    it means “also.” The other options do not convey this relationship.

 3. (C) “Accordingly” shows a cause-and-effect relationship, which
    makes sense given that the sole witness was absent and the judge
    wanted the witness to appear. The other options do not show a cause-
    and-effect relationship.

 4. (B) “In the meantime” means that someone can do something else
    while another thing is happening. The spectators can do other things
    as they wait for the delayed play to begin, making “in the meantime”
    an appropriate transition. The other options do not convey this idea.

 5. (B) “Nevertheless” shows a contrast, unlike the other options. A
    contrast is appropriate in this context since although the meal seems
    strange, it ended up tasting quite good.

 6. (D) The text is outlining the steps that you should take when chopping
    vegetables. The second step out of the three steps is to get the cutting
    board and knife, making choice (D) the only logical option.
 7. (A) “Granted” is synonymous with “it is true that . . .” In this context,
    the narrator Is stating that while he tries to give the children the best
    possible advice, he may fall short in the quality of the advice since he
    is not an expert in psychology. The other options do not acknowledge
    the truth of the situation.

 8. (A) The squirrel returned “afterward” to get another walnut after
    initially grabbing and storing one. The other options would not convey
    the timeline of events.

 9. (D) “With this object” means “with a goal.” In this context, the baker
    wants to make something for diners who cannot eat gluten; given this
    goal, he finds flour that allows him to make something they can enjoy.
    The other options do not express the appropriate connection.

10. (D) The grader is looking for support for the thesis, so it is important
    “to illustrate” your argument. The other options are grammatically
    incorrect.

Exercise 2
 1. The parasitic European cuckoo decreases the mother bird’s output and,
    in some cases, kills all offspring, ________ decreasing the host bird’s
    fitness. On top of reproductive output, the mother bird must put in
    additional work to feed the equivalent of a nest full of babies that is
    just one large baby.

     Which choice completes the text with the most logical transition?

     (A) however
     (B) but
     (C) therefore
     (D) previously

 2. “Ladies and gentlemen of the class of ’97, wear sunscreen. If I could
     only offer you one tip for the future, that would be it.” ______ begins
     a well-known commencement speech; the speaker goes on to explain
   why his advice about careers and life goals may or may not be helpful
   to the students, but the advice to wear sunscreen will always be
   applicable.

   Which choice completes the text with the most logical transition?

   (A) Whereas
   (B) Additionally
   (C) Thus
   (D) Also

3. In 1907 when a financial crisis (one of the foreshocks of the panic that
    would lead to the Great Depression) took place, Morgan took charge.
    Banks were on the brink of falling apart. People were going to lose
    their savings; the situation was dire and the government at the time did
    not have the power to intervene in a meaningful way. ______ Morgan
    did.

   Which choice completes the text with the most logical transition?

   (A) So,
   (B) Additionally,
   (C) Formerly,
   (D) Moreover,

4. The Roseto Effect was first studied in Roseto, Pennsylvania, where
   there lived a tight-knit community whose diets contained significant
   levels of fatty acids. _________ members of the town eating high
   levels of fats, drinking alcohol, and commonly smoking tobacco, the
   town’s residents had significantly lower rates of cardiovascular
   diseases than those in surrounding areas.

   Which choice completes the text with the most logical transition?

   (A) Despite
   (B) Because of the
    (C) Given the
    (D) Whenever

5. While the concept of a government bailout is fairly new, the idea of
   external powers stepping in to try to boost the economy is not. Prior to
   the era of governmental intervention, _________ it was big business
   who worked to protect the economy and with it, their profits.

    Which choice completes the text with the most logical transition?

    (A) consequently,
    (B) also,
    (C) due to this,
    (D) however,

6. Easily one of the most distinctive painters associated with the surrealist
   movement of the early 20th century, Frida Kahlo _________ insisted
   adamantly throughout her career that she was by no means a surrealist
   herself.

    Which choice completes the text with the most logical transition?

    (A) consequently
    (B) moreover
    (C) accordingly
    (D) nonetheless

7. A good broad range sunscreen can, when used properly, prevent
   sunburn for hours. __________ if a product has a sun protection factor
   (SPF) of 30, that means that skin can be exposed for 30 times longer
   without burning than if no protection was used.

    Which choice completes the text with the most logical transition?

    (A) Despite this,
    (B) For example,
     (C) In contrast,
     (D) Also,

 8. Despite its sinister and somewhat draconian reputation,
    electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) is making a rather surprising return
    in the treatment of chronic clinical depression. Like many of its
    pharmaceutical counterparts, the exact physiological mechanism
    responsible for ECT’s alleviation of the symptoms of depression
    remains elusive, ______ its results are inarguably remarkable.

     Which choice completes the text with the most logical transition?

     (A) and
     (B) since
     (C) with
     (D) but

 9. Sunlight is different from the light that a person experiences from a fire
    or a light bulb. Sunlight is mostly UV light, which has a much shorter
    wavelength than the light we turn on when we use the bathroom in the
    middle of the night. __________ if the earth’s protective ozone layer
    didn’t filter out much of the UV light, humans would risk their health
    just by going about their everyday lives during daylight hours.

     Which choice completes the text with the most logical transition?

     (A) Meanwhile,
     (B) Nonetheless,
     (C) Indeed,
     (D) As a result,

10. If school were operated on a year-round basis, student retention of
     material would be strengthened since it is much easier to forget
     material over a three-month break than over a two-week one. Material
     retention is especially vital for subjects like math and foreign language
     in which more advanced units will not make sense without a sound
    basis in the earlier material. __________ if students have more
    frequent breaks from the rigors of school, they are less likely to burn
    out.

     Which choice completes the text with the most logical transition?

     (A) However,
     (B) Consequently,
     (C) Additionally,
     (D) On the other hand,

Answer Explanations

 1. (C) This option is the only choice that shows a cause-and-effect
    relationship between the European cuckoo acting parasitically toward
    other birds and the resulting decrease in the host bird’s overall fitness.
    Choices (A) and (B) show a contrast, and choice (D) unnecessarily
    inserts a time sequence indication.

 2. (C) “Thus” is used to make the idiomatic phrase “Thus begins”; this
    phrase provides a logical transition between the quotation that started
    the speech and the clarification of the significance of the speech. It is
    not choice (A) because there is no contrast, and it is not choices (B) or
    (D) because this is not an additional piece of information, but a
    clarification.

 3. (A) “So” correctly expresses a cause-and-effect relationship between
    the earlier sentence, which says that there was a dire situation with no
    government help, and the current sentence expresses that Morgan did
    intervene. The other options do not express a cause-and-effect
    relationship.

 4. (A) “Despite” signifies an oppositional relationship between the first
    part of the sentence, which states that the diets of the town’s residents
    are not particularly healthy, and the unexpected lack of cardiovascular
   disease among the residents. The other options do not convey a
   contrasting relationship.

5. (D) “However” is the appropriate transition in this context, since the
   sentence points out the contrast between the current era of
   governmental intervention and an era in the past when privately based
   bailouts were more commonplace. Choices (A) and (C) would show
   cause and effect, and choice (B) would be used to list an additional
   item or idea.

6. (D) “Nonetheless” is used to show a contrast between the fact that
   Frida Kahlo is considered a surrealist by society, yet she did not
   consider herself a surrealist. Choice (A), “consequently,” and choice
   (C), “accordingly,” show cause and effect. Choice (B), “moreover,” is
   synonymous with “also.” This is a good example where you can use
   the similarities among choices (A) and (C) to eliminate them.

7. (B) “For example” is appropriate since the current sentence provides
   an example of what makes a high-quality sunscreen. It is not choices
   (A) or (C) because there is not a contrast, and it is not choice (D)
   because the current sentence provides an example, not simply an extra
   point.

8. (D) The word “but” is the appropriate transition. The sentence
   contains a contrast—scientists do not know exactly how ECT works,
   but they do know that the results are remarkable. The transitions in
   choices (A), (B), and (C) do not indicate a contrast.

9. (C) “Indeed” is used to introduce a further point that elaborates on the
   previous point made; in this case, “indeed” connects the previous
   sentence that states that sunlight is mostly UV light and the current
   sentence that underscores the potential danger from UV light to
   humans. It is not choices (A) or (B) because there is not a contrast,
   and it is not choice (D) because there is not a cause-and-effect
   relationship.
10. (C) The word “Additionally” correctly indicates that this sentence
    builds upon the argument in the previous sentences. Choice (B),
    “Consequently,” indicates a cause-and-effect relationship. Choice (A),
    “However,” and choice (D), “On the other hand,” both indicate a
    contrast.

Rhetorical Synthesis Questions

A new type of question on the Digital SAT is the rhetorical synthesis, or
“rhetorical analysis,” question. You will be asked to consider the notes that
a student has taken on a topic and determine the best way to use the
information in the notes to present or emphasize a particular idea. On
questions like these, be sure to really focus on what the question asks so
that you can zero in on the most relevant evidence.

   Example

While researching a topic, a student has taken the following notes:
 The classical Humanist ideal of human individualism can be represented
 by Leonardo da Vinci’s “Vitruvian Man.”
 The Vitruvian Man was an emblem of Humanism and the source for the
 civilization model that assumes Europe is not just a location, but a
 universal standard of humankind.
 Posthumanism tends to turn away from the nature and culture binary and
 questions the distinctions between what is considered human and
 nonhuman.
 Posthumanism rejects individualism by discouraging human-centered, or
 self-centered, thought, and instead urges interconnection between self,
 others, and nonhuman others.

The student wants to emphasize what makes Humanism different from
Posthumanism. Which choice most effectively uses relevant information
from the notes to accomplish this goal?
     (A) Humanism focuses on a concern for others, while Posthumanism
         embraces self-centeredness.
     (B) Humanism argues for individualism, while Posthumanism rejects
         it.
     (C) Humanism focuses on geography, while Posthumanism is
         concerned with politics.
     (D) Humanism advocates compassion for all living things, while
         Posthumanism focuses on the needs of humans alone.

   Answers

The correct answer is choice (B). Focus on the specific question: “The
student wants to emphasize what makes Humanism different from
Posthumanism.” Look at the bullets to determine what makes the two ideas
different. The first bullet shows that individualism is associated with
classical Humanism. The final bullet shows that Posthumanism rejects
individualism. So, choice (B) is correct in articulating the differences
between these two ideas. It is not choice (A) because this gets the two ideas
backwards. It is not choice (C) because Humanism is not concerned with
geography whatsoever, and Posthumanism is only loosely related to
politics. It is not choice (D) because Humanism focuses on individualism
rather than extensive compassion, and Posthumanism is in fact open to the
consideration of the needs of nonhumans.

Rhetorical Synthesis Practice Questions
Exercise 1
Select the best choice out of the four options.

 1. While researching a topic, a student has taken the following notes:
 Personal trainers are fitness experts who help clients implement their
 health and exercise goals.
 Trainers often personally guide their clients with customized workouts.
 They can help clients with their greatest areas of need, like endurance,
 strength, or flexibility.
Trainers ensure that clients train safely, helping them maintain the proper
exercise form.
Some trainers choose to pursue a four-year degree in exercise science or a
related field, while others complete a one-year certificate program.
In addition to a formal education, trainers are almost always expected to
have CPR training.

    The student wants to present a how personal trainers can prevent
    clients from becoming injured. Which choice most effectively uses
    relevant information from the notes to accomplish this goal?

    (A) Personal trainers often pursue educational credentials, like an
        exercise science degree, that gives their clients confidence in
        their skills.
    (B) For clients who need help with building their strength and
        endurance, a personal trainer is an excellent option.
    (C) Personal trainers can customize workouts for clients, improving
        their chances of achieving their fitness goals.
    (D) Through monitoring the proper exercise form of their clients,
        personal trainers help clients train safely.

2. While researching a topic, a student has taken the following notes:
More than 70 percent of the Earth’s surface is covered with water.
Water makes up most of the human body.
Water is a rather simple compound: 2 hydrogen atoms covalently bonded
to 1 oxygen atom.
Water has several unique chemical properties that make it rather suitable
for life.
Water is considered a universal solvent, enabling cells to use nutrients and
oxygen.

    The student wants to emphasize the widespread prevalence of water.
    Which choice most effectively uses relevant information from the
    notes to accomplish this goal?
    (A) Covering over 70 percent of the Earth’s surface, water is widely
        found on our planet.
    (B) Since it is a universal solvent, water is quite useful in biological
        processes.
    (C) The simplicity of the composition of water belies the complexity
        of the organisms in which it is found.
    (D) Many chemical compounds, including water, make up the human
        body.

3. While researching a topic, a student has taken the following notes:
During the late 1800s, the private boxes at the Academy of Music Opera
House were reserved for the most elite families in New York City.
After being excluded from the Academy of Music private boxes, some
newly wealthy families met to create a new opera house.
The new opera house would be more extravagant than the Academy of
Music one, giving the families an opportunity to display their great wealth.
The newly formed opera house was called the Metropolitan Opera house,
known today as the “Met.”
Just three years after the formation of the Met, the Academy of Music shut
down as people flocked to the new performing center.
Today, the Met continues to perform at Lincoln Center in New York City

    The student wants to present a likely emotional cause for the
    formation of the Met. Which choice most effectively uses relevant
    information from the notes to accomplish this goal?

    (A) Feelings of exclusion from the elite society of the Academy of
         Music likely motivated wealthy families to create an alternative
         organization.
    (B) A pure love of musical artistry by wealthy families most likely
         propelled them to initially create the Academy of Music.
    (C) It is remarkable that the Met has endured over the span of three
         different centuries.
    (D) After the closure of the Academy of Music, wealthy families
         who earnestly missed operatic performances created the Met.
4. While researching a topic, a student has taken the following notes:
Claire of the Sea Light is a novel by Edwidge Danticat.
In the work, the woes of Haiti are addressed directly and indirectly.
The narrative threads through the lives of a town where everybody knows
everybody and no one tragedy can exist on its own.
The novel emphasizes several themes:
   displacement and exile
   disrupted familial relationships,
   the inheritance of trauma and loss
   the fluidity of personal identity and belonging
The novel’s attention to current sociopolitical issues offers a more
multifaceted and activist-oriented personal account than some of
Danticat’s other novels.

    The student wants to summarize how Danticat treats the concept of
    personal identity in Claire of the Sea Light. Which choice most
    effectively uses relevant information from the notes to accomplish this
    goal?

    (A) Danticat articulates how family is at the core of what gives
        people their authentic identity.
    (B) Danticat shows that tragedy can affect not just one person but
        everyone in a town.
    (C) Danticat observes how activists tend to experience a reduction in
        social exile.
    (D) Danticat emphasizes how personal identity can be ever-changing
        instead of constant.

5. While researching a topic, a student has taken the following notes:
An adjuvant is a substance that enhances the body’s immune response to
an antigen.
Adjuvants are used in the field of medicine.
They are used as a possible solution to antibiotic resistant bacteria in
patients.
 Gaston Ramon, a French veterinarian, discovered adjuvants while
 observing and treating diseases in horses.
 Adjuvants are coupled with antibiotics to re-sensitize bacteria to
 antibiotics, making the antibiotics effective again.
 E. coli without the transcription factor, EF-P, are more sensitive to
 antibiotics than E. coli with it.

     The student wants to emphasize how modern doctors might use
     adjuvants to improve patient outcomes. Which choice most effectively
     uses relevant information from the notes to accomplish this goal?

     (A) Doctors might use adjuvants to help patients who are infected
         with antibiotic-resistant bacteria.
     (B) Adjuvants can be especially useful in helping those in emergency
         room settings.
     (C) An adjuvant is the most helpful treatment for patients with an E.
         coli infection.
     (D) Veterinarians discovered the extremely useful technology of
         adjuvants; now the technology is used on human patients.

Answer Explanations

 1. (D) The question asks us to present how personal trainers can prevent
    client injury. Choice (D) accomplishes this task by stating that through
    making sure clients use the proper exercise form, the clients will avoid
    injury. Choice (A) focuses on education instead of injury prevention.
    Choice (B) focuses on strength and endurance, which is not nearly as
    directly related to safe training as choice (D). Choice (C) vaguely
    mentions client workout customization.

 2. (A) “Prevalence” means commonality—choice (A) shows just how
    widespread and common water is on our planet. It is not choice (B)
    because this is much more indirect in suggesting the prevalence of
    water. It is not choice (C) because this focuses on complexity instead
    of commonality. It is not choice (D) because this limits the discussion
    to the human body instead of discussing how widespread water is.
 3. (A) The notes state that “after being excluded from the Academy of
    Music private boxes, some newly wealthy families met to create a new
    opera house.” Based on this, the likely emotional cause for the
    formation of the Met was a feeling of exclusion, as noted in choice
    (A). It is not choice (B) because there is no evidence that a pure love
    of music was the primary motivation. It is not choice (C) because this
    has nothing to do with an emotional cause. It is not choice (C) because
    the Met was created before the end of the Academy of Music, helping
    to bring about its demise.

 4. (D) The question asks us to summarize how Danticat treats the
    concept of personal identity in the novel. Choice (D) effectively
    accomplishes this task by paraphrasing the note that a theme of the
    novel is “the fluidity of personal identity and belonging.” Choice (A)
    is incorrect because Danticat highlights “disrupted familial
    relationships,” not how family is the key to personal identity. Choices
    (B) and (C) do not relate to personal identity.

 5. (A) The notes state that adjuvants are used “as a possible solution to
    antibiotic resistant bacteria in patients.” Therefore, if a student wants
    to show how the adjuvants can be used to improve patient outcomes,
    emphasizing how they reduce infection in antibiotic resistant bacteria
    makes sense. Choice (B) is not supported by the notes. While E. coli
    are mentioned in the final bullet, the point is not on whether adjuvants
    are particularly helpful but on the type of E. coli that is more sensitive
    to antibiotics—this makes choice (C) incorrect. Choice (D) does not
    elaborate on the relative effectiveness of adjuvants.

Exercise 2
Select the best choice out of the four options.
 1. While researching a topic, a student has taken the following notes:
 In single-celled organisms, mitosis is used for reproduction.
 Mitosis also occurs in more complex organisms for tissue growth and
 replacement of cells.
In mitosis, the nucleus splits to form two sets of identical chromosomes
resulting in two daughter cells with the same genetic material.
Meiosis is cell division particular to organisms that use sexual
reproduction.
Meiosis splits the number of chromosomes in parent cells in half so that
they can combine in offspring.
Meiosis is essential for genetic diversity.

    The student wants to emphasize a significant similarity between
    mitosis and meiosis. Which choice most effectively uses relevant
    information from the notes to accomplish this goal?

    (A) Mitosis and meiosis are both used by living things for
        reproduction.
    (B) Mitosis maintains the same genetic material, while meiosis leads
        to greater diversity.
    (C) Mitosis and meiosis are used equally by organisms throughout
        the Earth.
    (D) Mitosis and mitosis both allow for exact copies of an organism to
        be replicated generation after generation.

2. In preparing for a physics experiment on simple harmonic motion
    (SHM), a student has taken the following notes:
SHM is periodic motion where the restoring force is proportional to the
displacement of the object in motion.
Examples of SHM are the simple pendulum and an object on a spring.
Periodic motion involves the oscillation of an object about an equilibrium
or lowest potential energy position.
Formulas for SHM assume relatively small oscillations.
The experiment will evaluate the impact of changing the mass of the
attached object and the length of the string on the length of the oscillations

    The student wants to emphasize the type of intervals at which an
    object in simple harmonic motion will most likely oscillate. Which
    choice most effectively uses relevant information from the notes to
    accomplish this goal?

    (A) When moving in a simple harmonic, an object will likely have
        oscillations at irregular intervals.
    (B) Objects in simple harmonic motion often utilize an object on a
        spring.
    (C) Experiments are needed to determine more about the mass of
        attached objects in a simple harmonic motion.
    (D) Objects in simple harmonic motion most likely move in a regular
        pattern.

3. While researching a topic, a student has taken the following notes:
The bullroarer is an instrument made of a wooden slat typically measuring
between 6 and 24 inches long, affixed at one end to a length of twisted
cord.
The bullroarer is widespread among ancient cultures, and is also known as
a “tundun,” or “whizzing-stick.”
The oldest known bullroarers were discovered in the Ukraine, and are
estimated to date from the Paleolithic era, approximately 17,000 B.C.E.
The sound of the bullroarer is rather unique and has been likened both to
an animal’s roar and the approach of a distant thunderstorm.
Pitch modulation can be achieved by altering the speed of rotation, or the
length of the cord.

    The student wants to emphasize the long duration of the bullroarer in
    human history. Which choice most effectively uses relevant
    information from the notes to accomplish this goal?

    (A) With a sound like a thunderstorm or animal roar, it is no wonder
        that the bullroarer has been popular for quite a while.
    (B) While Ukraine is the location of a bullroarer discovery, other
        locations around the world can make a similar claim to fame.
    (C) Having been by humans since at least the Paleolithic era, the
        bullroarer has been a part of human music for at least 17
        millennia.
    (D) More ancient than any other instrument in human history, the
        bullroarer is a foundational component of many civilizations.

4. While researching a topic, a student has taken the following notes:
Feminism endeavors to create equality and empowerment for all persons.
Feminist theory is therefore used to analyze the reasons behind social
inequality.
Beth Richie is an African American feminist and professor.
Her book Arrested Justice: Black Women, Violence, and America’s Prison
Nation is an important work in the field of feminist theory.
Richie’s goal is to expose the ways black women have been left in
particularly vulnerable and dangerous positions.
Richie’s research concludes that Black feminist theory provides an
effective and forceful counter-narrative that can help dismantle the
inequality of incarceration.

    The student wants to emphasize the connections between Richie’s
    goal and the general idea of feminist theory. Which choice most
    effectively uses relevant information from the notes to accomplish this
    goal?

    (A) Arrested Justice: Black Women, Violence, and America’s Prison
        Nation is a work by the noted feminist Beth Richie.
    (B) Richie epitomizes the feminist quest to understand social
        inequality by endeavoring to understand why black women have
        been left in vulnerable positions.
    (C) Feminism examines why social inequality exists so that there can
        be a more equitable society.
    (D) The inequality of incarceration is something that many
        contemporary authors have examined.

5. While researching a topic, a student has taken the following notes:
A spectrometer is an instrument that spreads a wave of electromagnetic
radiation into its component frequencies.
 If you look at a simple beam of white light through a spectrometer, you
 will see a continuous band of colors shifting like a rainbow from red to
 violet.
 When a material is heated, you can look at the flames given off through a
 spectrometer to determine what chemicals make up the material.
 This is possible because the band of light is broken into a series of lines
 that represent specific frequencies of electromagnetic radiation that are
 emitted from the compound.
 Astronomers can attach a spectrometer to a telescope to determine the
 chemical composition of stars.

     A student wants to present what makes the spectrometer useful to
     astronomical research. Which choice most effectively uses relevant
     information from the notes to accomplish this goal?

     (A) While a spectrometer can spread a wave of electromagnetic
         radiation into the frequencies that compose it, astronomers are
         more likely to find its capacity to create a beam of white light
         more useful.
     (B) Since a spectrometer can use light from a heated object to
         determine the object’s chemical composition, astronomers can
         use it to determine the chemical makeup of stars.
     (C) Astronomers can use a spectrometer to determine the distance
         that certain astronomical bodies, like stars, are from Earth.
     (D) When astronauts take a spectrometer with them into space, they
         can put chemicals from meteorites into the spectrometer to
         determine the meteorites’ chemical composition.

Answer Explanations

 1. (A) The student wants to emphasize a major similarity between
    mitosis and meiosis. According to the notes, mitosis is used by single-
    celled organisms for reproduction, and meiosis is used by organisms
    that use sexual reproduction. Therefore, both processes are used by
    living things for reproduction. It is not choice (B) because this shows
    a difference between the two. It is not choice (C) because there is no
   evidence presented in the notes that both processes are used equally
   throughout the Earth. It is not choice (D) because meiosis does not
   create exact copies of organisms, but instead blends parts of their
   genetic compositions in creating offspring.

2. (D) The student wants to emphasize the type of intervals at which the
   SHC motion will likely oscillate. Choice (D) is the only option that
   uses the notes to describe the intervals of oscillation—they are regular
   since the notes describe the motion is “periodic.” It is not choice A
   because the oscillations will be regular, not irregular. It is not choice
   (B) or (C) because these do not describe the oscillation intervals.

3. (C) Choice (C) emphasizes the long duration of the bullroarer in
   human history by showing that the bullroarer has been around for
   millennia, since the Paleolithic era. It is not choice (A) because this
   focuses on the sound of the instrument instead of its duration. It is not
   choice (B) because this does not discuss time. It is not choice (D)
   because it is too vague—we have no clear sense from this just how
   ancient the bullroarer is.

4. (B) According to the notes, “Richie’s goal is to expose the ways black
   women have been left in particularly vulnerable and dangerous
   positions.” Moreover, according to the notes, feminist theory is
   generally “used to analyze the reasons behind social inequality.”
   Choice (B) connects these two ideas. choice (A) just states a fact
   about Richie’s authorship. Choices (C) and (D) do not directly connect
   to Richie.

5. (B) The spectrometer is useful to astronomers because it can attach it
   to a telescope to determine the chemical composition of stars—choice
   (B) makes this capacity clear. Choice (A) is not supported by the notes
   since the spectrometer is used to analyze beams of light, not create
   them. It is not choice (C) because the spectrometer is not used to
   determine distance. It is not choice (D) because chemicals are not
   inserted into the spectrometer; instead, the light emitted from the
   objects is analyzed.
Additional Practice Exercises
The problems in these exercises represent the variety of SAT Writing
questions you could encounter. Take about ten minutes for each exercise.

Exercise 1
 1. The European cuckoo mother bird does not randomly deposit her egg;
    she chooses the nests of specific species with eggs that resemble
    _______ the European cuckoo. She deposits her egg and leaves it with
    the other bird’s eggs, and that is the extent of her parenting.

     Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the
     conventions of Standard English?

     (A) those of
     (B) these of
     (C) this from
     (D) this of

 2. On certain occasions, he is brutally ashamed of his ______________
    overcompensates for his treachery by defending his father at all costs.

     Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the
     conventions of Standard English?

     (A) father’s deceit, on others he
     (B) fathers deceit: on others he
     (C) father’s deceit; on others, he
     (D) fathers’ deceit—on others, he

 3. With music that is highly repetitive, Glass has been referred to as a
    minimalist and aligned with the work of other composers like La
    Monte Young, Terry Riley, and Steve Reich.
    _____________________________ marked by a nonnarrative and
    nonrepresentational conception of a work in progress, and represents a
   new approach to the activity of listening to music by focusing on the
   internal processes of the music.

   Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the
   conventions of Standard English?

   (A) Minimalism a term that Glass has taken strides to distance
       himself from, is
   (B) Minimalism: a term that Glass has taken strides to distance
       himself from is
   (C) Minimalism—a term from which Glass has taken strides to
       distance himself—is
   (D) Minimalism, a term from which Glass has taken strides to
       distance himself—is

4. When searching for jobs, your online profile should be very thorough.
   Make sure to post a _________ allows the employer to see that you
   are a real person with real skills and makes you more likely to be
   interviewed.

   Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the
   conventions of Standard English?

   (A) professional picture, this
   (B) professional picture: this
   (C) professional; picture this
   (D) professional picture this

5. Do ever you remember hearing in school that the sun—by far the
   largest body in our solar system—is composed almost entirely of the
   two smallest elements, ___________________

   Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the
   conventions of Standard English?

   (A) hydrogen, and helium.
    (B) hydrogen and helium.
    (C) hydrogen, and helium?
    (D) hydrogen and helium?

6. If you choose to teach at the secondary level, it is best to be ready to
    answer questions about college, career planning, and young adult
    issues. One thing is ___________ a good teacher is there because they
    want to be.

    Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the
    conventions of Standard English?

    (A) for sure,
    (B) for sure: a good
    (C) for sure a good
    (D) for a

7. Detractors argue that the lack of scientific oversight during underwater
   construction is bound to result in failure. ________ many anticipate
   the wealth of knowledge and new discoveries that will certainly
   follow underwater monitoring.

    Which choice completes the text with the most logical transition?

    (A) And,
    (B) Consequently,
    (C) Still,
    (D) Therefore,

8. While researching a topic, a student has taken the following notes:
Pierre-Auguste Renoir was a lead painter in the impressionist movement.
He was born in Limoges, Haute-Vienne, France in 1841.
The artists Camille Pissarro and Edouard Manet inspired his style and
painting techniques.
His most popular paintings consist of: Dance at Le Moulin de la Galette,
Luncheon of the Boating Party, and The Swing.
 Renoir’s paintings are known for their vibrant light and saturated color.

     The student wants to emphasize what makes Renoir’s paintings
     distinctive. Which choice most effectively uses relevant information
     from the notes to accomplish this goal?

     (A) Renoir was uniquely influenced by the impressionist artists
         Pissarro and Manet.
     (B) Dance at Le Moulin de la Galette is one of Renoir’s most famous
         works.
     (C) The famous impressionist artist Pierre-Auguste Renoir was born
         in France in 1841.
     (D) Renoir’s impressionist paintings are known for having saturated
         color and vibrant light.

Answer Explanations
 1. (A) “Those of” correctly represents a logical comparison between the
    nests of the cuckoo and the plural nests of other birds. Choices (C) and
    (D) are both singular, and choice (B) incorrectly uses “these,” which is
    improper wording in a comparative situation.

 2. (C) The semicolon in this choice separates the two independent
    clauses. The apostrophe before the “s” after “father” indicates singular
    ownership. The comma after “others” gives a necessary break after the
    introductory phrase. Choice (A) creates a run-on. Choice (B) does not
    show possession. Choice (D) shows possession of plural fathers.

 3. (C) The dashes set aside the parenthetical phrase, and the word choice
    in choice (C) is logical. Choices (A) and (B) do not set aside the
    parenthetical phrase. Choice (D) uses inconsistent punctuation to set
    aside the phrase.

 4. (B) The colon serves to give a needed pause between the independent
    clause before the colon and the clarifying independent clause after the
    colon. Choices (A) and (D) each produce a run-on sentence. Choice
    (C) interrupts “professional picture.”

 5. (D) The sentence asks a question, so a question mark is needed,
    making choices (A) and (B) incorrect. Since just two items are listed,
    there is no need for a comma to separate them, making choice (C)
    incorrect and (D) correct.

 6. (B) The colon is appropriate because it indicates a clarification to
    follow. Choice (A) results in a comma splice, while choices (C) and
    (D) result in run-on sentences.

 7. (C) This is the only option that provides a needed contrast between the
    argument in the first sentence that the process will result in failure and
    the current sentence in which there is the potential for a wealth of
    knowledge and discoveries. The other options do not convey a
    contrast.

 8. (D) The notes state that “Renoir’s paintings are known for their
    vibrant light and saturated color.” This shows what makes his
    paintings unique or distinctive. It is not choice (A) or (C) because
    these do not focus on Renoir’s paintings. It is not choice (B) because
    this does not analyze why this painting is famous.

Exercise 2
 1. There are more ways than ever to market yourself and your skills, and
    to network with other professionals in your field. You will want to
    make sure you are competing in the online job hunt. Career websites
    like LinkedIn and Monster make it simple to get started. Within your
    online profiles, it is critical that you _______ information about your
    educational background, previous work experience, internships,
    research positions, and volunteer efforts. Now is not the time to be
    modest.

     Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the
     conventions of Standard English?
   (A) included
   (B) include
   (C) including
   (D) to include

2. Newton’s equation explained why that apple fell onto his head,
   _______________ and how Earth orbits the sun. It also allowed
   NASA scientists to send a man to the moon many years later.

   Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the
   conventions of Standard English?

   (A) why on the ground one firmly stays,
   (B) on the ground one firmly stays,
   (C) why one stays firmly on the ground,
   (D) one stays firmly on the ground,

3. In his book The Secret Life, Dali inquires as to why in a restaurant
    when he requested a grilled lobster, he was never _______ a boiled
    telephone.

   Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the
   conventions of Standard English?

   (A) brung
   (B) brought
   (C) bring
   (D) brang

4. A spectrometer is an instrument that spreads a wave of electromagnetic
   radiation into its component frequencies. When you look through a
   spectrometer at a beam of white light, ______________ a continuous
   band of colors shifting like a rainbow from red to violet.

   Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the
   conventions of Standard English?
   (A) and you see
   (B) and one can see
   (C) and he or she can find
   (D) you see

5. By creating a metric theory of gravitation, Einstein showed that
   phenomena in classical mechanics correspond to inertial motion
   within a curved geometry of space-time. This scientific discovery laid
   the groundwork in both astrophysics and cosmology for years to
   come. Not only did the theory help to explain an irregularity in
   Mercury’s orbit, but _________ and set the theoretical foundations for
   black holes.

   Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the
   conventions of Standard English?

   (A) the bending of starlight was also demonstrated by it
   (B) starlight used it to bend the demonstration
   (C) it also demonstrated how starlight bends
   (D) demonstrating the starlight

6. A popular theory posits that Neanderthals met their extinction through
   absorption. That is—supposing Neanderthals were not a distinct
   species, _______ rather a subspecies of Homo sapiens—some
   researchers believe that they disappeared after interbreeding with
   humans when they arrived in Eurasia roughly 80,000 years ago.

   Which choice completes the text with the most logical transition?

   (A) but
   (B) and
   (C) or
   (D) to

7. For those interested in pursuing a career as an environmental engineer,
   a bachelor’s degree is a must. _______ a degree in environmental
     engineering is necessary, related fields such as general or civil
     engineering can be acceptable as well.

     Which choice completes the text with the most logical transition?

     (A) If
     (B) When
     (C) While
     (D) So

 8. While researching a topic, a student has taken the following notes:
 Biltmore Estate sits on 8,000 acres of land in Asheville, North Carolina.
 It took around six years to complete, starting in 1889 and opening for his
 family on Christmas Eve in 1895.
 The mansion has an indoor swimming pool, bowling alley, conservatory,
 and library.
 George Washington Vanderbilt II built the estate after falling in love with
 the scenery and climate of the area.
 The Biltmore Estate is the largest privately owned house in the United
 States.

     The student wants to summarize some of the unique architectural
     features of Biltmore. Which choice most effectively uses relevant
     information from the notes to accomplish this goal?

     (A) The land on which Biltmore sits is approximately 8,000 acres.
     (B) Builders took approximately six years to complete Biltmore.
     (C) Biltmore boasts both a conservatory and a bowling alley.
     (D) The climate and scenery of the Asheville area made for a
         uniquely beautiful setting for a large home.

Answer Explanations
 1. (B) The text is in the present tense, and “include” is the only option
    that maintains this consistent tense. Moreover, “you include”
    demonstrates the proper conjugation of the verb.
 2. (C) This is the only choice that is parallel to the other items listed in
    this sentence. Not only are the other options not parallel, they also
    have confused word orders.

 3. (B) “Brought” is the correctly used tense of “to bring” in this context.

 4. (D) “Specific” in this case means “unique,” stating that the chemical
    signature given off by each element is unique to it. Choice (A) is too
    wordy. Choice (B) is incorrect because “partial to” means “to prefer”
    something. Choice (C) uses an adverb instead of an adjective.

 5. (C) This choice is correct because the construction of the second part
    of the sentence is parallel to the first part of the sentence; additionally,
    it puts the words in a logical order. Choice (A) uses passive voice.
    Choice (B) confuses the intended meaning. Choice (D) is not parallel.

 6. (A) “But” will logically complete the phrase “not” this, “but rather”
    that. The other options would not complete this phrase appropriately.

 7. (C) The sentence conveys a contrast between what is necessary and
    what is acceptable. “While” is the only option that provides a contrast.

 8. (C) The notes state that “the mansion has an indoor swimming pool,
    bowling alley, conservatory, and library.” Since these features are
    architectural, citing some of them makes sense if the student wants to
    summarize some of the unique architectural features found at
    Biltmore. The other options focus on nonarchitectural features, like
    the land area of the property, how long it took to build, and the setting
    of the home.


Advanced Practice
The following questions are designed to represent the most challenging
sorts of questions you could encounter on the SAT Writing. Take about ten
minutes for each exercise.
Exercise 1
 1. It wasn’t until 1915 that Albert Einstein expanded on Newton’s work
     to impart his theory of general relativity, which states that the gravity
     of any mass curves the space and time around it. Einstein’s theory of
     relativity is superior to ___________ because it considers special
     relativity and can be used when great precision is necessary.

     Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the
     conventions of Standard English?

     (A) Newton
     (B) it
     (C) these
     (D) Newton’s law of universal gravitation

 2. While using Bernice and Marjorie to model both eras, Fitzgerald finds
    flaws in _____________ the new approach is only relaxed on the
    surface.

     Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the
     conventions of Standard English?

     (A) both: the old manner is a lifeless forgery, while
     (B) both, the old manner is a lifeless forgery while
     (C) both—the old manner is a lifeless, forgery, while
     (D) both; the old manner, is a lifeless forgery while

 3. In these settings, occupational therapists work with clients to help them
     better participate _______ the areas of occupation.

     Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the
     conventions of Standard English?

     (A) in all the any of
     (B) in any all of
     (C) in any or all of
   (D) in all of and any of

4. One possible justification for involving humans in the actual
   exploration is that ___________ increase interest in funding space
   exploration projects.

   Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the
   conventions of Standard English?

   (A) they do
   (B) it does
   (C) one do
   (D) OMIT the underlined portion

5. It can be described as one of the greatest mysteries of modern physics.
    In a universe that _____________________ neutrality, the apparently
    asymmetrical distribution of the baryon charge is a singular and
    tantalizing puzzle.

   Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the
   conventions of Standard English?

   (A) tends universally, as it were toward net
   (B) tends—universally, as it were toward net
   (C) tends—universally as it were, toward net
   (D) tends—universally, as it were—toward net

6. Panes created using the glass spinning technique are usually
   identifiable for their bulbous centers and wavy surface
   ____________________ the edges joining with the window frame are
   typically narrower than the pane’s body.

   Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the
   conventions of Standard English?

   (A) texture, additionally they are often very fragile, as
    (B) texture; additionally, they are often very fragile, as
    (C) texture. Additionally they are often very fragile as
    (D) texture additionally, they are often very fragile, as

7. Recent studies of Neanderthal anatomy and artifacts suggest that they
   were remarkably well-equipped to deal with the fiercely cold and
   barren conditions, ___________ even thrived within them for nearly
   200,000 years.

    Which choice completes the text with the most logical transition?

    (A) and
    (B) but
    (C) for it was the case that they
    (D) OMIT the underlined portion.

8. While researching a topic, a student has taken the following notes:
In The Republic, Plato attempts to create a blueprint for a just city-state in
which its constituents prescribe to reason and live in communal harmony.
In his construction of an ideal city-state, Plato reevaluates the kinship
(family) relations that comprise society.
Plato sought to replace the kinship system with a new model in which
people who aren’t blood relatives still interact in ways now reserved for
familial relations.
Plato argued that the city-state forms a communal family: “every time he
meets any of them, he will assume he is meeting his brother, or sister, or
mother, or son, or daughter—or the child or parent of one of these.”
Plato claims that his new model would eliminate the familial loyalty that
supersedes state loyalty.

    The student wants to present a generalization about how Plato thought
    about the family and the state. Which choice most effectively uses
    relevant information from the notes to accomplish this goal?

    (A) Those who have blood relationships to one another should be
        excluded from being in the same governmental state.
    (B) Loyalty to the members of one’s family should rightly take
        precedence over loyalty to one’s government.
    (C) Plato argued that the connections between members of a state
        should outweigh the connections from familial relations.
    (D) Kinship is at the core of what will create a monarchical system,
        with the monarchy passed from one generation to the next.

Answer Explanations
 1. (D) This is the only option that gives a logical comparison between
    the theory of Einstein and the theory of Newton. Be sure to compare
    the same sorts of objects to one another.

 2. (A) In choice (A), the colon comes after a complete sentence right
    before the flaws are clarified and the comma comes before the
    transitional “while.” Choice (B) results in a run-on sentence. Choice
    (C) has an unnecessary comma after “lifeless.” Choice (D) has an
    unnecessary comma after “manner.”

 3. (C) This works because the occupational therapist could potentially
    help with “any” of the areas or “all” of the areas. Choices (A) and (B)
    do not use prepositions correctly, and choice (D) uses “and,” which
    would not make sense because both “all of” and “any of.”

 4. (B) The “it” refers to the act of involving humans in exploration,
    which would be singular. “Does” is the correct form of the verb “to
    do” when coupled with a singular subject. Choice (D) could
    potentially work if instead of “that” it said “the” immediately before
    the underlined phrase, and if instead of “increase” it said “increased”
    immediately following the underlined phrase.

 5. (D) This is the only option that sets off the parenthetical phrase with
    the same sort of punctuation on either side, i.e., a dash. Commas can
    also set up parenthetical phrases, but there must be a comma before
    and after the phrase.
 6. (B) The semicolon provides a needed break between the two
    independent clauses, and the comma after “additionally” gives an
    appropriate pause separating the transition from the complete sentence
    that follows. Choice (A) is a run-on sentence, choice (C) lacks a
    needed comma after the introductory word “Additionally,” and choice
    (D) is also a run-on.

 7. (A) The last part of this sentence gives more support to the claim in
    the first part of the sentence, making “and” appropriate. Choice (B)
    shows contrast, choice (C) is too wordy, and choice (D) removes a
    needed transition.

 8. (C) The notes state that “Plato sought to replace the kinship system
    with a new model in which people who aren’t blood relatives still
    interact in ways now reserved for familial relations.” In other words,
    Plato believed that the connections between citizens of a country
    should be more important than the connections between family
    members—this aligns with choice (C). It is not choice (A) because
    there is no evidence to suggest that Plato believed that people of the
    same family could not be in the same country. It is not choice (B)
    because this gets Plato’s argument backwards. It is not choice (D)
    because the notes do not focus on the possibility of a monarchy.

Exercise 2
 1. Piketty’s data on the wealthy elite makes it somewhat pioneering
    despite its foundations in age-old economics.
    _____________________ redistribution through a progressive global
    tax on wealth.

    Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the
    conventions of Standard English?

    (A) Piketty even offers a solution; economic
    (B) Piketty, even offers a solution, economic
    (C) Piketty even offers a solution: economic
   (D) Piketty even offers, a solution economic

2. As glass enters the bath, its specific gravity and immiscibility with tin
   ____________ a continuous ribbon with perfectly smooth surfaces on
   both sides and an even width throughout.

   Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the
   conventions of Standard English?

   (A) causes it to form
   (B) causes them to form
   (C) cause them to form
   (D) cause it to form

3. While Pluto is in orbit around the sun and has become nearly round, it
   isn’t big _________________. In other words, Pluto is not
   gravitationally dominant in its area and shares its space with
   astronomical bodies of a relatively large size.

   Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the
   conventions of Standard English?

   (A) enough, and therefore doesn’t have enough gravity, to clear its
       orbit.
   (B) enough and therefore, doesn’t have enough gravity, to clear its
       orbit.
   (C) enough and therefore doesn’t have enough gravity to clear, its
       orbit.
   (D) enough, and, therefore, doesn’t have enough gravity, to clear its
       orbit.

4. The Parthenon Temple itself was completed in 438 B.C., although
   decorative sculpting and engraving within the structure went on for
   several more years. Since then, the structure has served as
   ______________________.
   Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the
   conventions of Standard English?

   (A) temple, treasury, church, and most recently, tourist attraction.
   (B) temple, treasury church, and most recently, tourist attraction.
   (C) temple treasury, church and most recently tourist attraction.
   (D) temple treasury church, and most recently tourist attraction.

5. Strindberg and Ibsen—writing in the same genre at the same point in
   history and emerging from both the same level of society and corner
   of the world—_____________ developed remarkably antithetical
   worldviews, each powerful enough not only to weather the criticism
   of the opposition but to develop and grow despite it.

   Which choice completes the text with the most logical transition?

   (A) nonetheless
   (B) consequently
   (C) also
   (D) divergently

6. The exchange is notable in that it is the first time Griselda directly
   asserts her desires to Walter, and although she desists as soon as he
   raises an objection, she allows herself, finally, at _____________ she
   feels to be right and honorable.

   Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the
   conventions of Standard English?

   (A) what she believes, to be the end of their marriage, to
       communicate to him what
   (B) what she believes to be the end of their marriage to communicate
       to him what
   (C) what she believes—to be the end of their marriage, to
       communicate to him what
    (D) what she believes to be the end of their marriage, to
        communicate to him what

7. Rognlie argues that, according to the law of diminishing returns, the
   rate of return will eventually __________ on to say that Piketty has an
   inflated idea of current return and doesn’t consider depreciation.

    Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the
    conventions of Standard English?

    (A) decrease; goes
    (B) decrease, goes
    (C) decrease; he goes
    (D) decrease, he goes

8. While researching a topic, a student has taken the following notes:
Cosmic expansion is the idea that an expanding universe could be traced
back to a single point.
The scientist Georges Lemaître hypothesized the idea of cosmic expansion
in 1927.
In 1929, scientist Edwin Hubble confirmed Lemaître’s work when he
discovered that galaxies were drifting apart.
For many scientists, Hubble’s observations gave convincing evidence of
the big bang theory.
The big bang theory states that after cosmic expansion, the universe
cooled to form subatomic particles.
The theory also states that these subatomic particles that created atoms and
the elements.
These elements went on to form stars and galaxies.

    The student wants to highlight the connection between the work of
    Lemaître and Hubble. Which choice most effectively uses relevant
    information from the notes to accomplish this goal?

    (A) Hubble provided experimental observations to support
        Lemaître’s hypothesis.
    (B) Lemaître used the observations that Hubble made about the big
        bang to formulate a comprehensive scientific theory.
    (C) Modern scientists greatly appreciate the detailed observations
        that both Lemaître and Hubble made in the 1920s.
    (D) Lemaître’s theory about subatomic particles was confirmed by
        Hubble’s theory about the big bang.

Answer Explanations
 1. (C) This option correctly uses a colon to set off a clarification. Choice
    (B) uses a comma, which does not provide a sufficiently significant
    pause. Choice (D) has a pause in an awkward spot. Choice (A) needs a
    complete sentence after the semicolon.

 2. (D) The compound subject of “specific gravity and immiscibility with
    tin” demands a plural verb; hence, “cause” works. Also, “it” is correct
    since the pronoun refers to the singular “glass.”

 3. (A) The parenthetical element here was tricky to diagnose.
    Nonetheless, “and therefore doesn’t have enough gravity” was the
    parenthetical element; remove it from the sentence and the clause still
    functions perfectly well. As a rule, a parenthetical element can be
    surrounded by two dashes or two commas to separate it from the rest
    of the sentence. Choice (B) uses the two commas but splits the
    parenthetical element into pieces. Choice (C) omits the first comma.
    Choice (D) has entirely too many commas within the parenthetical
    element, preventing continuity. Choice (A) is the best option.

 4. (A) This choice gives necessary breaks between all the listed items
    and has a break after the clarifying phrase “most recently.” Choices
    (B), (C), and (D) all change the original meaning because of their
    comma placements or lack thereof.

 5. (A) “Nonetheless” means “in spite of,” which makes sense given the
    fact that these writers had similar backgrounds yet ended up having
    very different worldviews. “Consequently” in choice (B) indicates
   cause and effect. “Also” in choice (C) indicates the continuation of
   thought. “Divergently” in choice (D) could apply toward the
   differences in their views but does not work as a transition to show a
   logical contrast.

6. (D) The entire phrase “at what she believes to be the end of their
   marriage” is parenthetical. Choice (D) is the only option that both
   leaves this phrase intact and places a comma at the end of it so that it
   is set aside from the rest of the sentence.

7. (C) This option both clarifies the subject and uses a semicolon to give
   a clear break between the independent clauses. Choice (A) does not
   have the necessary independent clause after the semicolon. Choice (B)
   does not give a parallel construction. Choice (D) creates a comma
   splice.

8. (A) The notes state that Lemaître hypothesized the idea of cosmic
   expansion, while Hubble made observations that confirmed this
   theory. It is not choice (A) because Lemaître preceded Hubble. It is
   not choice (C) because this does not explain how Lemaître and
   Hubble are connected. It is not choice (D) because there is no
   evidence that Lemaître had a theory about subatomic particles.
PART 5
  Math
Math for the Digital SAT

Introduction and Strategies
What Is Tested on the SAT Math? What Math Classes Should I
Have Taken?
The SAT Math focuses on the core math skills that you will need to be
successful in a variety of college majors and future careers. No matter if
you are an engineer, a nurse, a teacher, a graphic designer, or a business
manager, it will be important to know how to work with numbers and
interpret data. Here is a big picture summary of what is tested:

  SAT Math Question                                          Math Class(es) That
       Type                         Definition                   Covers It
 Algebra                    Interpretation of linear        Mostly covered in Pre-Algebra
                            equations and solving systems   and Algebra 1
                            of equations
 Problem Solving and Data   Demonstration of literacy       Covered throughout your Pre-
 Analysis                   with data and graphs with       Algebra, Algebra 1, and
                            real-world applications         Algebra 2 coursework
                                                            Science classes can also
                                                            provide helpful data
                                                            interpretation skills.
 Advanced Math              Working with more               Mostly covered in Algebra 2
                            complicated equations
 Geometry and               Working with lines, angles,     Mainly in Geometry and Pre-
 Trigonometry               triangles, circles, and other   Calculus
                            geometric figures


How Is the SAT Math Section Structured?
 Two modules, 22 questions each, 35 minutes each
 First module is of a standard difficulty, second module of an adaptive
 difficulty (will be easier or more difficult depending on student
 performance on the first module)
 Four of the questions (two per module) are experimental and will not
 count towards the score.
 Algebra will be about 35% of the questions; Advanced Math will be about
 35% of the questions; Problem Solving and Data Analysis will be about
 15% of the questions; and Geometry and Trigonometry will be about 15%
 of the questions.
 The questions generally become more difficult as you proceed through a
 given module.

What Is Not Tested on the SAT Math? What Do I Not Need to
Worry About?
If you have taken the ACT, you may recall how that test has quite a few
more advanced math concepts. Some of the concepts you will NOT need to
know for the SAT that are tested on the ACT include:
 Matrices
 Logarithms
 Hyperbolas
 Ellipses
 Cosecant, Secant, Cotangent
 Permutations and Combinations

How Does the SAT Math Differ from Typical Math Tests I
Have Taken in School?
Often, students have difficulty with the SAT Math because they approach it
the same way as they would typical school math tests and quizzes. This is
especially true for high-achieving students who consistently earn A’s in
their math classes—after all, if their approach works well on one math test,
why wouldn’t it work well on another math test like the SAT? By realizing
that the SAT Math is quite a bit different from typical school math tests,
students are empowered to have a different mindset to help them be
successful.
                Typical School Math
                   Tests/Quizzes                            SAT Math
Time            Typically, you don’t have to         You will likely need the full
Management      worry much about time                amount of time to finish.
                management.
                                                     Move through the test carefully
                Tests often do not take the entire   and efficiently to complete
                class period, or you may be          every question.
                allowed to stay after class to
                finish up.

Scoring Curve   If you miss a couple of              Since the test is heavily curved,
                questions, your grade may drop       do not worry about missing a
                quite a bit.                         couple questions.
                To get an A, you may need to         To get a good score, you do not
                aim for perfection.                  need to aim for perfection.

Concepts        Usually highly focused on a          Tests on a variety of concepts
Tested          particular set of concepts you       from multiple years of
                have recently studied                coursework
                For example, a test on your          Cannot go on “autopilot” and
                factoring unit will focus just on    just start solving the problem—
                factoring. You have a good           have to figure out what the
                sense of what each question will     question is about
                likely be about.

Problem         Often, if you do not “know” the      While there is a good bit you
Solving         formula or problem-solving           need to know, the emphasis on
Process         process from class, you will         SAT Math problems is to
                have trouble coming up with the      “figure them out” by any means
                answer.                              necessary.
                                                     Unconventional methods like
                                                     using estimation, intuition, and
                                                     plugging in answers are much
                                                     more applicable.

Possible Test   If there is an error on your test    SAT Math problems go through
Errors          or quiz, just let your teacher       multiple rounds of review
                know and it can easily be fixed.     before they are put on an actual
                                                     test.
                                                     Rather than trying to find the
                                                     flaw in the question, give the
                                                     question the benefit of the
                                                     doubt.
                   Typical School Math
                      Tests/Quizzes                         SAT Math
 Need to           Your teacher may expect you to     You are evaluated simply on
 Explain           solve the problem in the way       whether you answered the
 Answer            you were taught, clearly writing   question correctly.
                   out every step so you can earn
                                                      Use whatever problem-solving
                   full credit.
                                                      method works best for you.


Can I Use a Calculator?
Yes—The SAT is fairly generous in terms of permitted calculators. Most
scientific and graphing calculators are permitted—for a complete, updated
list of approved calculators, check here:
https://collegereadiness.collegeboard.org/sat/taking-the-test/calculator-
policy. Also, there is a calculator embedded within the testing program. You
can click to use it whenever you need to do so. The calculator is modeled
on the popular Desmos calculator program. On the older paper-based SAT,
there was a no-calculator section; on the Digital SAT, you can use a
calculator on all the questions in the math modules.

How Do the Fill-in Questions Work?
Approximately 25% of the math questions are fill-ins. Unlike the paper-
based SAT in which the fill-in questions were at the end of the section, on
the Digital SAT the fill-in questions come at periodic times throughout the
test. Here are some important things to know about these problems.
 It is sometimes possible to have more than one correct answer—if you
 fill in any of the correct answers, you will be fine. For example, if the
 correct answer could be any number between 4 and 6, if you entered 5.5
 you would be correct.
 Decimals that continue past the spots allowed for gridding can be
 rounded or shortened, as long as you use all of the spaces on the grid.
 You can also express the decimal as a fraction. For example, you can write
    as 7/9, .7777, or .7778 (Note that 0.8, 0.77, or, 0.78 would be considered
 incorrect.).
 You don’t need to reduce fractions. For example, since      , and are
 equivalent, any of them would work as an answer.
 Use the Answer Preview tool. When you enter your answer, use the
 Answer Preview tool to check that what you intend for your answer is
 what you actually have down.
The bottom line on fill-ins: The SAT will not trick you into missing the
problem. If you have a reasonable answer and enter it, you will be in good
shape.

Do They Provide Any Formulas?
The SAT will provide some of the most important geometry and
trigonometry formulas. However, since most of the test covers algebra, you
will need to commit algebraic formulas to memory. Here are the formulas
you will be given in the testing program as a popup you can open or close
as needed.
KEY FACTS:
 A circle has 360 degrees.
 There are 2π radians in a circle.
 There are 180 degrees in a triangle.

How Should I Pace Myself on the SAT Math?
The questions generally increase in difficulty as you progress through them.
So, instead of trying to set a stopwatch for each individual question, use
these general guidelines:
 Take between 70–100 seconds per question. If it is an easier/earlier
 question, go closer to 60–70 seconds; if it is a harder/later question, go
 closer to 90–100 seconds. Since the earlier questions are easier, you can
 spend about 5-6 minutes on the first five questions; since the later
 questions are more difficult, you can spend about 8-9 minutes on the last
 five questions.
 Check your pace at reasonable intervals—every five to six questions is
 generally a good time to see if you are on pace. If you check your pace
 with each problem, you waste time looking at the timer. On the other
 hand, if you do not check your pace at all, you may be surprised when the
 timer appears with five minutes remaining. Click on the timer whenever
 you need to see how much time remains. So long as the timer is not
 distracting, you could leave it visible throughout the section.
 Try to do the problems once and well instead of rushing to the end.
 With so many word problems on the SAT Math, it is very easy to make a
 careless mistake by misreading the problem the first time through. Instead
 of rushing to the end, focus on doing the problems carefully the first time
 to maximize your score.
If you cannot finish the test in a reasonable amount of time, guess on the
most difficult questions. These questions will typically come towards the
end of the math module.

If you find an earlier question to be overly difficult, go ahead and guess on
it—you do not want to spend two to three minutes on a problem and not get
anywhere. You can flag the question and come back to it if you have time.
Try to be decisive when guessing on a problem; if there are certain problem
types that you know are more difficult for you, like long word problems or
particular math concepts, guess on those without investing lots of time.

How Can I Use This Book to Prepare for the SAT Math?
 Read the strategies that follow in this section to help you with your test-
 taking mindset.
 Target your review by studying the math content areas where you have
 struggled.
   Practice your time management with the SAT problem drills throughout
   the chapter.
   Take full-length SAT Math tests and review your answers afterwards.
   Brush up on weak areas through content review.
   Challenge yourself with the advanced math drills at the end of the chapter
   to simulate the toughest questions you could encounter.

 SAT Math Dos and Don’ts

 Do fully understand the question, actively checking understanding as
 you go. Read slowly and carefully, doing the problem one time well.

 Don’t go on to the next sentence unless you fully understand the
 previous one. Don’t let a desire to finish quickly ultimately make you go
 more slowly and less accurately.

    Example
 Four roommates are splitting the rent equally on an apartment. Currently,
 each roommate’s share is $500 a month. If they were to add one more
 roommate with whom they would equally split the monthly rent, by how
 much would the monthly rent for each of the original four roommates
 decrease?

       (A) $80
       (B) $100
       (C) $120
       (D) $400

    Solution
 Fully understand each sentence of the question.

The total rent for an apartment is divided into four equal shares.
Each share is currently $500. This means that the total amount of rent for the
apartment is 4 × 500 = 2,000.
If one more roommate is added, the total rent must now be divided by 5
 nstead of 4. So, the new rent per person is         .

 Now does this mean the correct answer is choice (D)? No—the question
 asks us how much each person’s monthly rent would decrease. So, subtract
 the new share from the original share to find the per-person decrease: 500 −
 400 = 100. Therefore, the correct answer is (B).

 Do pay attention to the precise question that is asked. Read the entire
 question, but pay especially close attention to what comes at the end of the
 text—that is most likely where the question wlil be found.

 Don’t get bogged down in clarifying information. Some of the
 information in a question may be given so there is no room for
 misinterpretation—do not dwell on clarifying information like this.

    Example

 The formula for compound interest is                     where A is the amount
 accumulated, P is the principal, r is the interest rate, n is the number of
 times interest is applied in a compounding period, and t is the number of
 compounding periods. What is the principal in terms of the other variables?

       (A)

       (B)

       (C)
       (D)

    Solution

 So that there is no room for misinterpretation (e.g., thinking that the
 constants could represent variables), the SAT clarifies what each constant
 represents in this question. You can ignore information like this and instead
focus on what the questions asks you to do. The most important parts of the
question are underlined below: The formula for compound interest is
                where A is the amount accumulated, P is the principal, r is
the interest rate, n is the number of times interest is applied in a
compounding period, and t is the number of compounding periods. What is
the principal in terms of the other variables?
   So, the problem is much easier to solve than it appears at first glance.
All we must do is divide both sides by             so that the P is by itself,




then simplify the expression:

Cancel out the like terms to simplify →




Use a negative exponent to show the part that was in the denominator:



Do watch out for key words that will change what you are asked to do.
In longer word problems and in questions where terms are easily confused,
be especially careful.

Don’t just assume that because your calculated answer is an option,
you must be correct. The SAT will have answer choices based on common
misreadings of the questions, so do not jump to conclusions.
Exercise—Spot the difference between the two very similarly worded
questions.
 1A. A drink stand charges $2 for a glass of iced tea and $1.50 for a glass
      of lemonade. If during an hour of operation, the stand sold a
      combined total of 14 glasses of tea and lemonade for a total revenue
      of $25, how many glasses of lemonade were sold?
 1B. A drink stand charges $2 for a glass of iced tea and $1.50 for a glass of
      lemonade. If during an hour of operation, the stand sold a combined
      total of 14 glasses of tea and lemonade for a total revenue of $25, how
      many glasses of iced tea were sold?
 2A. If the diameter of a circle is 10 units, what is the numerical difference
      between the area and circumference of the circle (ignore squared
      units)?
 2B. If the radius of a circle is 10 units, what is the numerical difference
      between the area and circumference of the circle (ignore squared
      units)?
 3A. Given that a = 3 and b = 4, what is the product of a and b?
 3B. Given that a = 3 and b = 4, what is the sum of a and b?

    Solutions

Glasses of lemonade vs. glasses of iced tea
Diameter vs. radius
Product vs. sum

 Do write out your work. Writing out your work on the scrap paper will
 help you avoid careless errors and recognize patterns that you might
 otherwise miss.

 Don’t do everything in your head. You will ultimately save time and be
 more accurate if you write out your work. Common incorrect answers are
 based on common miscalculations.

    Example

 Which of the following expressions is equivalent to the polynomial below?
     (A) −2x2 − x
     (B) 3x2 − 2x
     (C) −3x4 + 11x3 − 6x2
     (D) 3x4 − 11x3 + 6x2

   Solution

This problem is not that difficult, yet it is easy to miss if you make an error
with negative signs or combining exponents. If you do make a common
error, it is highly likely that one of the answer choices will have your
incorrect solution. Students who are good at math yet impatient to finish the
test are susceptible to this sort of error. So, write out your work step-by-step
to get it right:

Remove the parentheses since you are not multiplying:



Group like terms together and simplify:




Do use whatever is given in the problem, like scaled drawings and
formulas. All the drawings on the SAT are to scale and problems
sometimes have formulas given within them, so take advantage of what you
have in front of you.

Don’t let yourself be intimidated by longer, more challenging questions.
Use whatever knowledge and skills you have to attack the problem.

   Example
Consider the function f(x) as portrayed in the xy-coordinate plane in the
above graph. For how many values does f(x) equal zero?

     (A) 0
     (B) 1
     (C) 2
     (D) 3

   Solution

Suppose that you do not remember how to work with complex functions
and find zeros. You can still solve this problem without that specific
knowledge. The question asks to find how many times the f(x) equals zero
—remember that f(x) is the same as the y-coordinate. Examine the points on
the graph where the y value is equal to zero:




There are a total of three points where the function is equal to zero because
it intersects the x-axis. Therefore, the correct answer is (D). While this
problem could also have been solved by creating an equation that had the
zeros in it, make things easier for yourself and do not be intimidated.

Do approach the problems like a puzzle that you figure out. You may
need to write out some work before you see the ultimate steps to solving the
problem.

Don’t just give up and say you don’t know. The SAT Math emphasizes
the core concepts from early high school math—in all likelihood, you have
the background knowledge necessary to solve the problem.

   Example



In the equation above, what is the value of the constant a?
Fill-in: ____________________

   Solution

This is not likely a problem you have typically worked with in your math
classes. However, you can solve it by using concepts you probably already
know—in this case, FOILing and simplifying. You do not need to know any
advanced concepts about constants or equation equivalence.



FOIL the part in parentheses:



Add the x terms and the numbers to simplify:




Divide both sides to eliminate the x2 →




The correct answer is therefore 9.

Do use the choices to help see what a solution may look like. Recognize
that the answers typically go from least to greatest, so if you need to work
your way backwards from the choices, start with answer (B) or (C) and then
work your way up or down. Also, use the choices to recognize helpful clues
as to your problem-solving process.

Don’t jump into the choices too quickly. While plugging in the options
does work sometimes, it won’t be as frequent as you might like. You will be
best served by carefully reading and setting up the problem step-by-step.
   Example

For what values of x does |x − 3| = 5?

     (A) 8 and 2
     (B) 8 and −2
     (C) −8 and 2
     (D) −8 and −2

   Solution

While you could set up two absolute value equations to solve, a glance at
the answer choices tells you that plugging in the possible answers will
probably save you time. Because each of the numbers 8, −8, 2, and −2 is in
each answer twice, you can eliminate choices more rapidly. First, let’s try
−8:

Since −8 does NOT work, we can eliminate choices (C) and (D).

Now, try −2 since it is in choice (B) and not in choice (A):



This does work, so the correct answer is choice (B). There is no need to also
try 8 since both choices (A) and (B) have 8 as a possibility, so trying it out
would give us no new information.

Do review and practice in a targeted way. Focus on the problem types
and math concepts that are most challenging for you.

Don’t practice by simply taking test after test, repeating the same
mistakes. Remember that practice doesn’t make perfect; “perfect practice”
makes perfect. Use this book to focus on areas of weakness so you may turn
them into areas of strength.

Here are the major concepts and formulas you will need to know, along
with where they are covered in the book:
Algebra—Fundamentals
 Order of Operations (page 307)
 FOIL (page 308)
 Least Common Multiple (LCM) and Greatest Common Factor (GCF)
 (page 310)
 Solving Fractions (page 311)

Algebra—Solving Equations
 Substitution (page 313)
 Elimination (page 314)
 Pattern Recognition (page 315)
 Plugging in Choices (page 316)
 Inequalities (page 321)
 Absolute Value (page 322)
 Function Notation (page 323)

Algebra—Word Problems and Function Interpretation
 Setting Up Word Problems (page 335)
 Distance, Rate, and Time (page 337)
 Interpreting Variables and Constants (page 338)
 Functions in Table Form (page 339)

Algebra—Lines and Slope
 Slope Formula (page 352)
 Slope-Intercept Form of a Line (page 353)
 Overlapping and Intersecting Lines (page 354)
 Parallel and Perpendicular Lines (page 355)

Advanced Math—Polynomials and Factoring
 Polynomial Manipulation (page 363)
 Common Factoring Patterns (page 365)

Advanced Math—Exponents and Roots
 Exponent Rules (page 370)
 Problems with Exponents and Roots (page 372)

Advanced Math—Solving Quadratic Equations
 Factoring Quadratic Equations (page 378)
 Square Root Method (page 380)
 Quadratic Formula (page 381)
 Completing the Square (page 383)
 Plugging in the Answers (page 385)
 Undefined Functions (page 387)
 Extraneous Solutions (page 388)
 Synthetic Division (page 390)

Advanced Math—Zeros, Parabolas, and Polynomial Graphing
 Zeros of a Function (page 401)
 Parabola Graphing (page 404)
 Function Transformations (page 409)
 Visualizing Polynomial Graphs (page 412)

Advanced Math—Function Interpretation and Manipulation
 Putting Variables in Terms of Other Variables (page 422)
 Identifying Constants (page 423)
 Interpreting Functions (page 424)

Problem Solving and Data Analysis—Measures of Center
 Mean (page 435)
 Median (page 436)
 Mode (page 437)
 Outliers (page 437)
 Range and Standard Deviation (page 438)
Problem Solving and Data Analysis—Unit Conversion
 Conversion with Proportions (page 445)
 Conversion with Unit Cancellation (page 446)

Problem Solving and Data Analysis—Percentages
 Percentage Essentials (page 451)
 Percent Increase and Decrease (page 454)
 Simple Interest (page 457)
 Compound Interest (page 458)

Problem Solving and Data Analysis—Surveys
 Sampling Methods (page 468)
 Drawing Conclusions (page 469)

Problem Solving and Data Analysis—Graphs and Data Interpretation
 Probability (page 474)
 Graph Interpretation (page 476)
 Scatterplots (page 478)
 Histograms (page 481)
 Tables (page 484)
 Box Plots (page 487)
 Linear and Exponential Growth (page 489)
 Interpreting Constants and Functions (page 492)

Geometry—Area, Perimeter, and Volume
 Rectangle Area (page 507)
 Triangle Area (page 507)
 Perimeter of Polygons (page 508)
 Parallelogram Area (page 509)
 Trapezoid Area (page 509)
 Surface Area (page 510)
 Volume of a Box, Cylinder, Sphere, Cone, and Pyramid (pages 512–514)

Geometry and Trigonometry—Lines, Angles, and Triangles
 Supplementary Angles (page 521)
 Vertical Angles (page 522)
 Parallel Lines and a Transversal (page 522)
 Angles, Triangles, and Quadrilaterals (page 524)
Trigonometry—Right Triangles and Trigonometry
 Pythagorean Theorem and Special Right Triangles (page 532)
 Sine, Cosine, Tangent (page 535)
 Area of an Equilateral Triangle (page 536)
 Sine and Cosine of Complementary Angles (page 537)

Geometry—Circles
 Radius and Diameter (page 542)
 Area and Circumference (page 543)
 360° in a Circle (page 543)
 Inscribed Angle (page 544)
 Arc Length (page 545)
 Sector Area (page 546)
 Circle Formula (page 547)
 Radians (page 548)
Algebra
This section contains comprehensive review and strategies for all of the
concepts below:

Algebra—Fundamentals
 Order of Operations
 FOIL
 Least Common Multiple and Greatest Common Factor
 Fractions

Algebra—Solving Equations
 Substitution
 Elimination
 Pattern Recognition
 Plugging in Choices
 Inequalities
 Absolute Value
 Function Notation

Algebra—Word Problems and Function Interpretation
 Setting Up Word Problems
 Distance, Rate, and Time
 Interpreting Variables and Constants
 Functions in Table Form

Algebra—Lines and Slope
 Slope Formula
 Slope-Intercept Form of a Line
 Overlapping and Intersecting Lines
 Parallel and Perpendicular Lines

Algebra—Fundamentals
Order of Operations
To remember the correct order of operations, use the popular acronym
PEMDAS: Please Excuse My Dear Aunt Sally.

        Please Excuse                  My Dear               Aunt Sally
     Parentheses () and other   Multiplication x × y   Addition x + y
     grouping symbols, like     Division x × y         Subtraction x − y
     or {}
     Exponents
     xy


  Example 1



  Solution

To simplify the above expression, calculate what is within the parentheses
first and square it.
Then multiply that number by 3. Finally, subtract 4 to get your answer.




  Example 2



  Solution

Calculate the square root of the numerator and denominator, and multiply
the total by −1.




Practice
 Simplify the following expressions.

2x + 3x = ?
5(2 − 4x) = ?
5(x2) + 2(x − 3) = ?




 Solutions

2x + 3x = 5x
5(2 − 4x) = 5 × 2 − 5 × 4x = 10 − 20x
5(x2) + 2(x − 3) = 5 x2 + 2x − 6




 FOIL
 Simplify polynomials by “FOILing” the parts of an expression like (a + b)
 (c + d) in this order:
 First, Outer, Inner, Last.




    Example



    Solution
 Practice

(x + 1)(x + 2) = ?
(−3 + x)(−4 + x) = ?
(2 − y)(3 + y) = ?
(2x + 1)(2x − 1) = ?
(2x − 5)(3 + 4x) = ?

 Solutions

     (x + 1)(x + 2) =
x2 + 2x + 1x + 2 =
x2 + 3x + 2

 (−3 + x)(−4 + x) =
(−3)(−4) + (−3)x + (−4)x + x2 =
12 − 7x + x2

 (2 − y)(3 + y) =
2 × 3 + 2 × y + (−y) × 3 + (−y) × y =
6 + 2y − 3y − y2 =
6 − y − y2

 (2x + 1)(2x − 1) =
(2x)(2x) − 1(2x) + 1(2x) − 12 =
4 x2 − 2x + 2x − 1 =
4 x2 − 1

(2x − 5)(3 + 4x) =
3(2x) + (2x)(4x) + (−5)(3) + (−5)(4x) =
6x + 8 x2 − 15 − 20x =
8 x2 − 14x − 15

 Least Common Multiple and Greatest Common Factor

 A multiple of a number is the result when the number is multiplied by a
 whole number, i.e., an integer. For example, multiples of 3 include 3, 6, 9,
 and 12.
    The least common multiple (LCM) of two numbers is the least value
 that some numbers share as a common multiple.

    Example

 What is the least common multiple of 6 and 8?

    Solution

 Multiples of 6 include 6, 12, 18, and 24.
    Multiples of 8 include 8, 16, and 24.
    So, the least number that 6 and 8 have in common as a multiple is 24.
    Factors of a number are numbers that can be multiplied together to give
 that number. For example, factors of 10 include 1, 2, 5, and 10 since 1 × 10
 = 10 and 2 × 5 = 10.

    The greatest common factor (GCF) of two numbers is the greatest factor
 that the numbers have in common.

    Example

 What is the greatest common factor of 8 and 12?

    Solution

 Factors of 8 are 1, 2, 4, and 8. Factors of 12 are 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, and 12.
    So the greatest common factor between the two is 4 since it is the
 greatest factor that 8 and 12 share.

 Practice

What are five multiples of the number 4?
What are the factors of the number 15?
How many factors does 7 have?
What is the least common multiple of 4 and 5?
What is the greatest common factor of 6 and 9?

 Solutions

Multiples of 4 could include 4, 8, 12, 16, 20, 24, 28, and so on.
1, 3, 5, and 15
7 is a prime number, which has just two factors—1 and itself (7).
Multiples of 4: 4, 8, 12, 16, 20, etc. Multiples of 5: 5, 10, 15, 20, etc. So, the
 east common multiple between them is 20.
Factors of 6 are 1, 2, 3, and 6. Factors of 9 are 1, 3, and 9. So the greatest
common factor between them is 3.

 Solving Fractions

 Examples of fractions include numbers like          and     . The numerator is
 on top of a fraction, and the denominator is on the bottom:
    For example, in the fraction , 2 is the numerator and 3 is the
 denominator.
    Fractions equal one another as long as the ratio of the numerator to the
 denominator is equivalent. For example,         , and are all equivalent
 since they are all equal to 0.75. Putting a fraction in its “lowest term”
 simplifies the fraction so that the numerator and denominator only have 1 as
 a common factor. For the group of        , and       is the lowest term since 3
 and 4 only share 1 as a common factor.
    If fractions have the same denominator, the fractions can be added or
 subtracted by adding or subtracting the numerators.
   Example 1



   Solution



To add and subtract fractions that do not have the same denominator,
change the fractions so they have a common denominator.

   Example 2



   Solution

To provide a common denominator, 3 and 4 can be multiplied together. So
that the fractions retain their values, multiply both the numerator and
denominator of each fraction by a ratio equivalent to 1 (i.e., or ).




   Example 3

The time it takes Henry to mop a certain floor is 10 minutes, and the time it
takes Tanner to mop the same floor is 8 minutes. What is the time it takes to
mop the floor if both of them work together the full amount of time to do so
(use the combined work formula below to solve)?
   Combined Work Formula:
          ta = Time for a to complete the work
          tb = Time for b to complete the work
          tc = Time for both a and b to complete the work

  Solution

Using the combined worked formula above, we can calculate the time it
will take both Henry and Tanner to complete the mopping. We can use 10
minutes as time a and 8 minutes as time b.




So, it will take minutes, or about 4.44 minutes, for both of them working
together to mop the floor.
   Use this rule to multiply fractions:



  Example 4



  Solution
Use this rule to divide fractions—flip the second fraction and multiply the
first one by it:               (b, c, and d cannot equal zero, or it will be
undefined.)

   Example 5



   Solution



Practice




Solutions
Algebra—Solving Equations
Substitution

When there is a system of two equations and two variables, it is often
easiest to substitute an expression in terms of the other variable for one of
the variables. That way, there is just one variable to work with.

   Example

What is the value of x in the set of equations below?




   Solution

To solve for x, use substitution of y in terms of x. Use the first equation, y =
x + 1, to put everything in terms of x in the second equation:




Elimination

If two equations have similar formats, eliminating variables can be the
easiest approach to solving the system of equations. Use multiplication to
reformat one of the equations so that it can be easily added or subtracted
from the other equation, eliminating one of the variables.

   Example 1



What is the value of x in the above system of equations?
   Solution

Recognize that if you add the two equations together, the y values will
cancel, leaving you only with x.




   Example 2

What are the values of x and y in the system of equations below?




   Solution

Use elimination to solve this. If you multiply the second equation by 2, you
will be able to eliminate the y variables and can then solve for x.




Then, plug 3 in for x into one of the equations to solve for y:




So, the solution set is x = 3 and y = −2.
Pattern Recognition

An excellent shortcut you can use to solve equations is to see if there is a
pattern that will allow you to easily rearrange the equations without having
to use substitution or elimination. If the SAT asks you to solve a problem in
terms of an expression rather than just a variable, odds are that you can use
pattern recognition to figure it out.

   Example

Given that 3(x + 4) = 2(x + 4) + 5, what is the value of x + 4?

   Solution

While you could distribute the 3 and the 2 through the values in the
parentheses and solving for x by itself, make things easier by just solving
for x + 4 as a whole.



   Subtract 2(x + 4) from both sides →




You will find far more pattern recognition types of problems on the SAT
Math than you are accustomed to finding in your typical math class
questions. Be on look out for them to save you time.

Pattern Recognition: Infinite Solutions
Building off the material in the Algebra Fundamentals, be able to recognize
when there are infinite solutions to a system of equations.
   If two equations with two variables can be simplified to be the same
equation, there will be infinite solutions. Another way to think about it—if
the lines have the same slopes and the same y-intercepts, they will overlap
and there will be infinitely many solutions.
   Example

How many solutions does the following system of equations have?




   Solution

Divide the second equation by 2 and you will see that it is identical to the
first equation:




Since the two equations can be written the same way, there will be infinitely
many sets of points that can be plugged in for x and y to be solutions for the
set of equations.

Pattern Recognition: Zero Solutions
If two equations written in linear form have identical slopes and different y-
intercepts, they will be parallel to each other and never intersect. Therefore,
there will be zero solutions between them.

   Example

How many solutions does the following system of equations have?




   Solution

Recall the slope-intercept form of a line: y = mx + b. If the lines have the
same slope and different y-intercepts, they will run parallel to each other.
These two lines have the same slope of 3, and different y-intercepts of −4
and 12. So, they will run parallel to each other, resulting in no solutions to
the system of equations.

Plugging in Choices

Sometimes it can save you time to simply plug in the answer choices to see
what the answer would be. Do this when it looks like plugging in the
choices will ultimately take you less time than solving the problem using
algebra.

   Example

|3x + 1| = 7

What value of x is a positive number that would be a solution to the above
equation?

(A) 1
(B) 2
(C) 3
(D) 4

   Solution
While it would be possible to solve this using algebra, you will likely save
time by working backwards from the choices. Since the choices on the SAT
Math are consistently in order from least to greatest, start with one of the
middle choices like (B) or (C). That way, if your answer is too big you can
try the smaller answers, and if it is too small you can try the larger answers.

Plug in choice (C) first:
So, 3 is too large of an answer. Let us now try the next smallest answer,
choice (B):




                                 SAT Math Strategy
  Save time by recognizing when substitution, elimination, pattern recognition, or plugging in
  choices will be the most efficient way to solve a system of equations.



This works, so the correct answer is choice (B).

This table breaks down how to recognize which strategy will likely be most
efficient.
 Practice
What is the value of x in this series of equations?




What is the value of y in this series of equations?




What is the value of 3x2 in the equation 6 x2 − 4 = 8?
What is the value of x in this series of equations?




What is the solution set for (x, y) in this series of equations?




What is the value of y in this series of equations?




How many solutions are there in this series of equations?




If |x − 4| ≤ 2, what is a possible value of x?

 Solutions
Substitute x − 3 in for y in the second equation to solve:



Double the first equation and then add it to the second to eliminate the x
components:




Recognize that you can manipulate the equation fairly easily to isolate 3 x2:
Divide both sides by 2 →


Simplify the first equation by dividing it by 3, then substitute it in to the
second equation:




Substitute this in the second equation →




Plug 1 in for y to solve for x:




With a little bit of manipulation, you can see the pattern, which makes this

easier to solve:

Manipulate the second equation to make it look like the first one:


Divide both sides by 2 →


So, since the second equation is equivalent to the first equation, there are
nfinitely many solutions.
Use elimination to solve—multiply the first equation by −4 to make it
possible to add and eliminate the x components:
Recognize the pattern here by simplifying the second equation to get it in
slope-intercept form:


Once this equation is in slope-intercept form, you can see that it has the same
slope as the first equation, 5, and a different y-intercept. Therefore, the lines
created by these two equations will never overlap or intersect, resulting in no
solutions.
Although this is a fill-in question, you could still try plugging in potential
answers to find one that would make this statement true. Since we know that
x − 4| ≤ 2, we could pick a value that is less than 2 and plug that in: |x − 4| =
1. Based on this, 5 would be a possible value for x.

Alternatively, you could do this algebraically as follows:


Break up the absolute value like this:


Add 4 to all parts of the expression:




So, any number greater than or equal to 2 and less than or equal to 6 would
work. As you can see, plugging in potential solutions would likely save you
ime.

 Inequalities
 An inequality indicates which value is greater than or less than another
 value. The open end of the > goes toward the larger number. For example:
 −3 < 0 and 10 > 4

 A line underneath a greater/less than sign indicates that the terms on either
 side can possibly equal one another. For example:

     8 ≥ n means that n is less than or equal to 8, or alternatively, that 8 is
                           greater than or equal to n.

 Inequalities can be solved like typical equations, with an important
 exception:

 If multiplying or dividing a side of the inequality by a negative number,
 change the direction of the inequality sign.

    Example

 Simplify the expression − 4x > 3.

    Solution



 Divide both sides by −4 and turn the > around to <.




 Practice

How would one express that x represents all the numbers greater than or
equal to 14?
If x > 4 and x < 9, what is a possible value for x?
Simplify − 2x + 4 > 6.

 Solutions

x ≥ 14
The values of x must be greater than 4 and less than 9, so any number
between 4 and 9 would work. (Note—it would not include 4 or 9 themselves
since the expressions do not indicate equality.)
− 2x + 4 > 6 →
   − 2x > 2 →
   Divide both sides by −2 and flip the sign:



 Absolute Value

 When you take the absolute value of a number, it represents how far that
 number is from zero. If you took the absolute value of −6 or 6, both would
 be 6 since they are both 6 units away from zero.
    Absolute value is written by putting two lines around the number—for
 example, the absolute value of 4 would be written as |4|. Calculate the
 absolute value of an expression by making the expression positive, no
 matter if the expression is originally positive or negative. Here are some



 absolute value expressions:

 To solve a typical absolute value equation, set it up as two equations—one
 with a positive and one with a negative value. (If the absolute value
 expression equals zero, there will be just one solution; if the absolute value
 expression equals a negative number, there will be zero solutions.)

    Example

 What are the possible values for x in the equation |x + 1| = 5?
    Solution

 |x + 1| = 5 can be set up as two different equations:




 Solve each equation for x to find the solutions:




 So x could be either 4 or −6.

 Practice

What is the value of |4 − 7|?
What are the possible values of x in the equation |x − 1| = 5?
Given that x is a real number, what is the least possible value for |x|?

 Solutions

4 − 7| → |−3| → 3
Set it up as two separate equations:



  Then solve each equation for x:



    So, x could be either 6 or −4.
If you take the absolute value of any real number, it will be the positive value
of that number. So, the least possible value for x is found when you take the
absolute value of zero: |0| = 0. Therefore, zero is the least possible value for
 x|.
 Function Notation

 Many of the expressions you encounter on the SAT Math will be equations
 with x and y values.
    However, be sure you understand function notation:

     f(x) = 2x + 1 is the same as y = 2x + 1; f(x) corresponds to the y value.

 If you were told that f(x) = 3x − 5 and asked to find the value of f (4),

 simply plug 4 in for x into the function:

 Finally, you may be asked to combine functions together. Be sure you work
 from the “inside out” to solve these.

    Example

 If f(x) = 4x − 3 and g(x) = 2x + 1, what is g(f (2))?

    Solution

 Start by calculating the value of f (2):




 Then, take 5 and plug it into g(x):




 Practice

If x is 4, what is f(x) if f(x) = 2x − 5?
If x is 8 and f(x) = x − 4, what is the value of 3 f(x)?
If f(x) = x2 and           , what is f (g(4))?
Solutions
1. Plug 4 in for x to the function:




2. First, determine the value of f(x) by plugging in 8 for x:



      Then, multiply 4 by 3 to see what 3 f(x) would be:


3. Work inside out to solve. First, determine g(4):




      Then, plug 2 into f(x):




Practice Drill #1—Solving Equations

(If timing, take about 12 minutes to complete.)
 1. 6 = 5x + 1

     What is the solution for x in the equation above?

     (A) 0
     (B) 1
     (C) 2
     (D) 3

 2. What value of x satisfies the equation 13x + 3 = 42?
   (A) 3
   (B) 5
   (C) 7
   (D) 10

3. 1.2x − 2.4 = 3.6

   What value of x is a solution to the above equation?

   (A) 4
   (B) 5
   (C) 6
   (D) 7

4. − |y + 5| = −4

   What are the solutions to the equation above?

   (A) 1 or −3
   (B) 1 or −9
   (C) −1 or 9
   (D) −1 or −9

5. What is the solution set for x and y at which these two lines would
   intersect?




   (A) (3, 7)
   (B) (1, 6)
   (C) (−4, 5)
   (D) (2, −1)



6. What is the value of a in the above equation?
   (A) 2
   (B) 3
   (C) 4
   (D) 5




7. Consider the system of equations above. What is the value of 7x − 8y?

   (A) 7
   (B) 8
   (C) 14
   (D) 19

8. 3x − 2 ≤ 2x + 3

   What is the greatest possible number that would work for x in the
   above inequality?

   (A) 3
   (B) 5
   (C) 8
   (D) 9

9. 2y = −6x + 14



   How many solutions are there to the above system of equations?

   (A) Zero
   (B) One
   (C) Two
   (D) Infinite
10.



      Based on the system of equations above, what is the product of x and
      y?

      (A) 30
      (B) 80
      (C) 120
      (D) 180

Solutions
 1. (B) 6 = 5x + 1 →
        5 = 5x →
        1=x
 2. (A) 13x + 3 = 42 →
            13x = 39 →
              x=3
 3. (B) 1.2x − 2.4 = 3.6 →
              1.2x = 6.0 →
                 x=      =5

 4. (D) − |y + 5| = −4 →
          |y + 5| = 4 →
      Make two separate equations and solve:




 5. (A) Use elimination to solve this series of equations, since the y’s can
     be easily cancelled if you multiply the first equation by 2:
    Then, add this to the second equation to eliminate:




    Fortunately, the only answer that has a 3 for the x value is choice (A),
    so you do not need to bother solving for y.
6. (C) 5(a − 1) − 2(a + 2) =    a→




7. (D) Although the equations present the x and y values in different
    orders, do your best to recognize that if you add these two equations

    together you will have the expression 7x − 8y:

    Change the order of the second equation, and add it to the first one:




8. (B) Simplify the inequality in order to see what the largest potential
    value for x could be:
      Since x can be any value less than or equal to 5, the largest possible
      value it could be is 5.

 9. (A) The two equations can be simplified to be in slope-intercept form:




      So, the lines have the same slope, which makes them parallel. They
      also have different y-intercepts, which means they do not intersect or
      overlap. Therefore, there are no points of intersection for the two
      lines and zero solutions.

10. (C) Multiply the first equation by 3 so that you can add the equations
     together and eliminate y.




      Now, add this equation to the second equation to eliminate the y’s:




      Now, plug 40 back in for x to one of the equations to solve for y:
      Now, multiply 3 and 40 together to give you 120.

Practice Drill #2—Solving Equations

(If timing, take about 12 minutes to complete.)
 1. 5x + 4 = −6

     In the equation above, what is the value of x?

     (A) −2
     (B) −1
     (C) 0
     (D) 1

 2. If −5(x − 3) + 2(x + 6) = 12, what is the value of x?

     (A) 3
     (B) 5
     (C) 8
     (D) 9

 3. If       , what is the value of a?

     (A)
     (B)
     (C)
     (D)

 4. y > 7 and y − 4 < 3x

     Based on the system of inequalities above, what are the possible
     values for x?

     (A) x < 0
     (B) x > 3
     (C) x < −11
     (D) x > 1

 5. If y + 1 > 2x and y > 3x + 2, which ordered pair would satisfy the
     system of inequalities?

     (A) (−3, 5)
     (B) (2, −4)
     (C) (1, 2)
     (D) (4, 0)

Fill-In Practice: Write your answer in the underlined blank under each
question.
 6. 11x + 3y = 7
     6x + 8y = 5

     If (x,y) is a solution to the above system of equations, what is the
     value of 5x − 5y?

     Answer: ________
 7. Consider this series of equations:
     x + 2y = 5
       y − x = −2

     What is the value of y?
     Answer: ________
 8. 2x − y = − 1
    2x + y = 7

     If (x,y) is a solution to the above series of equations, what is the value
     of x?

     Answer: ________
 9. For the function g, if g(5x − 1) = x + 4, what is the value of g(4)?

     Answer: ________
10. 3x − 2y = 7
      x+y=9

     In the system of equations above what is the value of x?

     Answer: ________

Solutions
 1. (A)



 2. (B)




 3. (A)




 4. (D) Simplify y − 4 < 3x to put it in terms of y:
    Then combine the two inequalities, y > 7 and y < 3x + 4, and
    simplify:




5. (A) This is a good example of plugging in the choices to solve. Choice
    (A) is the only option that will be true for both the x and y values in


    the pair:

    And:




6. (2) This is a great example of a pattern recognition problem. If you
    subtract the second equation from the first one, you will get it to look


    like 5x − 5y:

7. (1) If you add the two equations together, the x’s will cancel, leaving
    you with only the y term to analyze. Rearrange the second equation, y
    − x = −2, so that the x term comes first and it can be more easily added


    to the first equation:
 8.           This is a great example of an elimination question. Add the
      two equations together to eliminate the y:




 9. (5) Since g(4) = g(5x − 1), find out what the value of x is by solving
     the equation 4 = 5x − 1:

      Then, plug 1 in for x in the right-hand side of the function:



      So, the value of g(4) is 5.

10. (5) If you double the second equation, x + y = 9, you can eliminate the


      y terms and solve for x:

Practice Drill #3—Solving Equations
(If timing, take about 12 minutes to complete.)
 1. If x − 3 = 0.5x, what is the value of x?

      (A) 2
      (B) 4
      (C) 6
      (D) 8

 2. If 5(x + 4) − 3(x + 4) = 3x − 2, what is the value of x?

      (A) 3
      (B) 4
      (C) 7
      (D) 10
3. If 3x is 5 less than 20, what is x + 4?

     (A) 4
     (B) 6
     (C) 8
     (D) 9

4. y + 5n = 3

     In the equation above, if y = 2, what is the value of n?

     (A)
     (B) 2
     (C)
     (D) 6

5. If         what is the value of y?

     (A) 1
     (B) 2
     (C) 6
     (D) 12

6. y = 3x − 5
   y = 3x + k

     Consider the system of equations above. What must the value of the
     constant k be so that the system of equations has infinitely many
     solutions?

     (A) −15
     (B) −8
     (C) −5
     (D) 0

7.      4x + y = 3
      − 3x − 2y = 4

       In the above system of equations, what is the point in the xy-
       coordinate plane at which the lines formed by the equations would
       intersect?

       (A) (2, −5)
       (B) (6, −3)
       (C) (9, 0)
       (D) (12, 6)

 8.        y=x+5
      2x + y = 11

       In the system of equations above, what is the value of x?

       (A) 0
       (B) 2
       (C) 4
       (D) 6

 9. If |x + 2| > 0, which of the following statements must be true?

       (A) x = −6
       (B) x = 5
       (C) x ≠ −2
       (D) x ≠ 0

10. If f(x) = 2x − 1, and g(x) = 3f(x), what is the slope and y-intercept of
     the line formed by g(x)?

       (A) Slope = 3, y-intercept = −1
       (B) Slope = 4, y-intercept = −2
       (C) Slope = 6, y-intercept = 3
       (D) Slope = 6, y-intercept = −3
Solutions

 1. (C)




 2. (D)




 3. (D) Turn the words into an algebraic expression. “If 3x is 5 less than
     20” is equivalent to:




     Since 3x = 15 → x = 5
     Therefore, x + 4 = 5 + 4 = 9

 4. (A) Plug 2 in for y and then solve for n:




     In the equation above, if y = −2, what is the value of n?

 5. (B)




 6. (C) Two equations will have infinitely many solutions if they overlap
     one another. Equations that have the same slope and y-intercept will
     overlap. Therefore, since the equations are already in slope-intercept
     form, make the constant k identical to the y-intercept in the first
     equation:
      So, the y-intercept is −5 and k should be −5.

 7. (A) Use elimination to find the point of intersection. Double the first
     equation and add it to the second equation to eliminate the y values:


      Now add this to the second equation:




      Fortunately, the only option that has 2 as the x value is choice (A), so
      you do not have to continue to solve for y.

 8. (B) Use substitution to solve this series of equations.




      Plug the first equation into the second one, then solve for x:




 9. (C) Given that |x + 2| > 0, choices (A), (B), and (D) all could be true.
     However, the only choice that must be true is choice (C). If x were
     equal to −2, then the inequality would say that 0 > 0, which cannot be
     the case.

10. (D) Plug f(x) = 2x − 1 into g(x):
        Now, it is in slope-intercept form, and we can see that the slope is 6
        and the y-intercept is −3.

Algebra—Word Problems and Function Interpretation
Setting Up Word Problems

So far in this section, you have worked with how to execute algebraic
operations. However, many SAT Math problems have you set up the algebra
by asking detailed word problems. Here are some of the most common
word problem phrases along with their corresponding mathematical
operations.


                                      SAT Math Strategy
   Know which wording corresponds to which mathematical operations to help you solve word
   problems.



       Wording Examples for Common Mathematical
                      Operations                                                     Operation
 is, are, was, were, will be, equals, gives, yields, results in, costs, sells for        =
 sum, plus, increased by, more than, together, combined, total(s), added to,             +
 greater than, older than, farther than
 difference, decreased by, less than, fewer than, minus, after, left over, younger       −
 than, shorter than, smaller than
 multiplied by, times, of, product of, twice, triple, quadruple                          ×
 Divided by, per, out of, split, average, ratio of, half of, one third of


   Example 1
Translate this sentence into an algebraic expression:
There are a total of 40 pets at a store, with x dogs and y cats.

   Solution
   Example 2
Translate these sentences into algebraic expressions:

Caitlin is 6 years older than Allison, and the sum of Allison’s age and
Caitlin’s age is 60 years.

   Solution

Let’s use C for Caitlin’s age and A for Allison’s age. Be careful to not to
make the equation go in the order of the words if the algebra does not
correspond. For the first half of the sentence, “Caitlin is 6 years older than
Allison,” the equation would be:

The second half of the sentence, “the sum of Allison’s age and Caitlin’s age
is 60 years,” would look like this algebraically:



   Example 3

A stoplight is always green, yellow, or red. It is green of the time and
yellow of the remaining time. What fraction of the entire time is the light
red?

Fill in: ________

   Solution

Read the question one step at time, writing out the relevant information.
Since the stoplight is always green, yellow, or red, we can determine the
fraction of time it is not red by subtracting the green, yellow, and red
fractions from 1; the remaining fraction will indicate the fraction of the time
it is red.
     The light is green of the time. The time that it is remaining would be
                   of the time. Out of the of time remaining, it is yellow
 of time time. So, calculate the fraction of time it is yellow by multiplying
 and :
    Then calculate the time it is red by subtracting , the fraction of time it
 is green, and    , the fraction of time it is yellow, from 1:

 Use 10 as the least common denominator:



 So, the light is red    of the entire time.

 Practice
 Turn these sentences into algebraic expressions.

Pam read 40 pages of her book on Monday, 30 pages of her book on Tuesday,
and x pages of her book on Wednesday for a total of 120 pages.
If Yusuf did 1 hour of homework on Sunday and twice as much homework
on Monday, how many hours did he do on both of those days?
Dog x is 5 years older than dog y.
Sofia spends two-thirds out of the 24 hours in a day awake. How would you
calculate the number of hours, h, she is asleep in a day?
The average weight of person A, B, and C is 150 pounds.

 Solutions

40 + 30 + x = 120
1 + 2(1) = 3 total hours of homework
Be sure you don’t just read this left to right. It should be set up as the
following:
From this expression, you can see that x is 5 greater than y.




 NOTE
 Averages will be covered in-depth in the Problem Solving and Data Analysis section.


 Distance, Rate, and Time
 The relationship among distance, rate (speed), and time is given by the
 following formula:

                       DISTANCE = RATE × TIME, or D = RT

 For example, if you were driving at 60 miles per hour for two hours, you
 would travel a total of 120 miles:

                                    D = RT
                         120 Miles = 60 MPH × 2 Hours

    Example

 Julia’s family took a road trip in which they drove 8 hours a day and
 averaged a driving speed of 50 miles per hour. If they spent a total of 6 days
 on the trip, how far in total did they drive?

    Solution

 Start by figuring out how far they drove on a given day:
Then, multiply the daily number of miles by 6 days to find the total number
of miles travelled:



So, they drove a total of 2,400 miles on the trip.

Interpreting Variables and Constants


                                 SAT Math Strategy
  Create your own idea of the meaning of a constant or variable before jumping into the
  options.



Sometimes, SAT word problems will not simply ask for you to solve for the
value of a variable, but to interpret the significance of a constant or a
variable.

   Example 1
A teacher is counting up his classroom supplies for inventory at the end of
the year. T is equal to the number of textbooks in his classroom at the end of
the year, and L is the equal to the number of laptop computers in his
classroom at the end of the year. In the equation T + L = 60, what does the
number 60 represent?

     (A) The product of the number of the laptops and the number of the
         textbooks at the end of the year in the teacher’s classroom
         (B) The combined total number of laptops and textbooks at the
         end of the year in the teacher’s classroom
     (C) The difference between the number of laptops and number of
         textbooks in the teacher’s classroom at the end of the year
     (D) The predicted value of the number of laptops and textbooks a
         year from now
   Solution
Following our strategy for problems like these, do not jump into the choices
before we have considered the meaning independently. T represents the
number of textbooks at the end of the year, and L represents the number of
laptops at the end of the year. If we add these together, we would get the
sum of the textbooks and laptops the teacher has at the end of the year.

               T + L = Total number of textbooks and laptops

This total is 60 in the problem. So, we can check out the choices and see
that choice (B), “The combined total number of laptops and textbooks at the
end of the year in the teacher’s classroom,” corresponds to this idea.

   Example 2

The height of water in inches, h, in a classroom’s fish tank after w weeks is
given by the function below.



Over a three-week period, by how much does the height of water in the tank
change?

     (A) Increases by .5 inches
     (B) Increases by 25 inches
     (C) Decreases by 1.5 inches
     (D) Decreases by 2.5 inches

   Solution
To answer this, we must first understand the meaning of the numbers in the
function before diving into the choices. The function is written in slope-
intercept form. The y-intercept is 25, indicating the initial height of water in
the tank before any weeks have gone by. The slope is − , indicating that
each week that goes by, the height of the water in the tank will decrease by
  an inch.

So, over a three-week period, we can see by how much the height in the
tank has changed by taking −    and multiplying it by 3:

Therefore, the height in the tank after three weeks have passed will decrease
by 1.5 inches, corresponding to choice (C).

Functions in Table Form
Most functions you will encounter will be in the form of an equation.
Sometimes, however, the SAT will provide the values of the function in a
table. Here is how you attack a problem formatted in this way:

   Example

The linear function f is defined by f(x) = ax + b, where a and b are
constants. The values in the table below represent ordered pairs for the
function:
                   x                                       f (x)
                  10                                       700
                  20                                    1200
What is the value of the constant b?

Fill In _______

   Solution

The way to read the table is to understand that each row represents an
ordered pair: (10, 700) and (20, 1,200). You can solve for the constant b by
first calculating the value of the constant a, which corresponds to the slope

of the line:
Now we know that the function can be written as f(x) = 50x + b. Next, solve
for b by plugging in an ordered pair—let’s use (10, 700) since it is smaller.




So, the value of the constant b is 200.

Practice Drill #1—Word Problems and Function Interpretation
(If timing, take about 12 minutes to complete.)
 1. The total number of pages in a book is T. Eloise will read P pages each
    day for exactly D days until she completes the book at the end of the
    final day. Which of the following expresses the relationship between
    these values?

     (A) T = PD
     (B)
     (C) T = P + D
     (D) T = P − D

 2. Mary rented a boat that cost a $100 flat fee plus $3 for each gallon of
    gasoline used. If Mary paid a total of $130 to rent the boat, how many
    gallons of gasoline did she use?

     (A) 10
     (B) 15
     (C) 30
     (D) 45

 3. An average pace for a backpacker on a certain trail is to hike 10 miles
    per day. If Joseph is taking a weeklong backpacking trip in which he
    wants his average pace over the entire week to exceed this average
    pace each day, which inequality represents the number of miles, m, he
    will travel on his trip?
   (A) m > 10
   (B) m < 10
   (C) m < 70
   (D) m > 70

4. A bread recipe calls for 6 eggs for every 10 cups of flour. If Martin
   wants to use a total of 15 eggs, how many cups of flour will he need to
   make this larger amount of bread using this recipe?

   (A) 15
   (B) 16
   (C) 25
   (D) 60

5. The number of windmills at a windfarm starts at 200, with 6 new
   windmills added each year and 2 mills removed each year due to wear
   and tear. What function represents the number of windmills, w, on the
   windfarm t years after the windfarm opens?

   (A) w(t) = 200 + 6t
   (B) w(t) = 200 + 4t
   (C) w(t) = 6 + 200t
   (D) w(t) = 200 − 4t

6. A catalog weighs enough that it requires 4 stamps for the post office to
   mail it. If a business is sending 500 catalogs, and each book of stamps
   has 20 stamps in it, how many books of stamps would the business
   need to purchase to mail all the catalogs?

   (A) 24
   (B) 80
   (C) 100
   (D) 2,000

7. Each student on a school trip packs 2 suitcases, 1 backpack, and 1
   personal object. If there are 65 students on the trip, how many total
     items would the students pack?

     (A) 69
     (B) 130
     (C) 196
     (D) 260

 8. The cost in dollars, C, of installing a sewer pipe that is L feet long is
    modeled by the function below:



Given that function, what is the most logical interpretation of the following
equation?



(A) The cost to install a 700-foot sewer pipe is 20 dollars.
(B) 20 times the cost of a typical pipe is equivalent to 700 dollars.
(C) The cost to install a 20-foot-long sewer pipe is 700 dollars.
(D) 20 typical sewer pipes have a total installation cost of 700 dollars.

 9. A plumber’s compensation is $50 per hour plus a $5,000 profit-share
    at the end of the year. Which inequality represents the number of
    hours, n, she will need to work in order to make at least $50,000 total
    compensation for the year?

     (A) 50,000 ≤ 50n + 5,000
     (B) 50,000 ≥ 50n + 5,000
     (C)
     (D)

10. The height in feet of an airplane, A, and a balloon, B, are modeled by
     these two equations, in which t is the number of minutes after 12:00
     P.M.
     At what time that same day would the airplane and the balloon be at
     the same height?

     (A) 12:30 P.M.
     (B) 12:50 P.M.
     (C) 1:00 P.M.
     (D) 1:45 P.M.

Solutions
 1. (A) Since she will read P pages each day for D days, multiply P and D
     together to get the total number of pages read:

 2. (A) Using x as the number of gallons of gasoline used, set up an
     equation modeling the situation like this:

     This means that the $100 flat fee plus $3 times each gallon of gas
     used will equal a total amount of $130. Then, solve for x:




     So, 10 gallons of gas were used.

 3. (D) If Joseph exceeds the average pace of 10 miles per day over the 7-
     day period, he will travel in excess of 10 × 7 = 70 miles all together.
     Express this as an inequality by making the number of miles, m, be
     greater than 70: m > 70.

 4. (C) Set up a proportion to solve this. There are 6 eggs for every 10
     cups of flour, and this ratio needs to equal the ratio when there are 15
     eggs (put the flour in the numerator since you are solving for flour,
    making you have to use fewer steps):




5. (B) Since the number of windmills begins at 200, this number can be a
    constant. Each year, a net of 4 windmills are added to the windfarm,
    since 6 are added and 2 taken away. Therefore, the function that
    portrays the situation is:

6. (C) The business will need to purchase a total of 4 stamps for each of
    500 catalogs, so to get the total number of stamps needed, multiply 4
    and 500 together:

    Then, calculate the number of stamp books needed by taking the total
    of 2,000 stamps and dividing it by the number of stamps in each
    stamp book, 20:
    So, 100 books of stamps would be needed.

7. (D) Each student packs a total of 2 + 1 + 1 = 4 personal items.
    Therefore, simply multiply 4 by 65 to find the total items the students
    would pack:

8. (C) Consider the original equation:



    Now, take a look at the other equation:



    The 20 goes in the place of the variable L, which represents the
    length of the pipe. Therefore, the length of the pipe in consideration
    is 20 feet. C(L) represents the cost to install a pipe of length L, so 700
    is the cost of installation for a pipe of 20 feet.
 9. (A) The plumber’s compensation is the sum of $5,000 plus $50 per
     each of n hours worked. This total compensation needs to be at least
     $50,000, meaning the sum of the hourly wages and the profit sharing
     needs to be greater than or equal to 50,000. Multiply 50 by n to get
     the total from the hourly wages, and then add it to the $5,000.



10. (B) Set the two heights equal to each other to solve for the number of
     minutes after 12:00 P.M., t, at which they meet in the air:



      Set them equal to each other and solve for t:




      So, take 50 minutes past 12:00 to get 12:50 P.M.

Practice Drill #2—Word Problems and Function Interpretation
(If timing, take about 12 minutes to complete.)
 1. If a cat eats x cups of food per day, how many cups of food will the cat
     eat in y days?

     (A) x − y
     (B) x + y
     (C) xy
     (D)

 2. The relationship between distance, D, rate, R, and time, T, is modeled
    by the equation D = RT. If the rate increases but the distance remains
    the same, what must happen to the time?
   (A) It decreases.
   (B) It increases.
   (C) It remains constant.
   (D) It cannot be determined.

3. The average price of a gallon of milk is modeled by the function C, in
   which y is the number of years after the year 2000.



   What does the number 0.08 in the function represent?

   (A) The number of gallons of milk sold
   (B) The average yearly increase in price per gallon of milk
   (C) The unit price for each gallon of milk
   (D) The total number of gallons of milk sold in a given year

4. Out of the 50 states in the United States, all but 1, Nebraska, have
   bicameral legislatures—i.e., there are two legislative chambers.
   Nebraska has a unicameral legislature—i.e., there is just one
   legislative chamber. What fraction of the states in the United States
   are bicameral?

   (A)
   (B)
   (C)
   (D)

5. Tabitha works as a cell phone salesperson. Her pay is $10 per hour
   plus $20 commission for each new cell phone she sells. If H
   represents the number of hours she works in a given week and C
   represents the number of cell phones she sells that week, which
   equation represents her total salary (expressed in dollars before any
   deductions for taxes, etc.) for the week?
     (A) Salary = 20H + 10C
     (B) Salary = 10H + 20C
     (C) Salary = 10H − 20C
     (D) Salary = 20H − 10C

 6. A movie theater concession counter sells a large popcorn for $5 and a
    small popcorn for $3. If the total number of both types of popcorn sold
    in a given day is 150, and the total revenue from the popcorn sales is
    $570, how many small popcorns were sold? (Ignore sales tax in your
    calculations.)

(A) 15
(B) 30
(C) 45
(D) 90

 7. The cost in dollars to operate a lemonade stand, C, is given by the
    function c(x) = .25x + 20, in which x represents the number of cups of
    lemonade sold. What does the number 20 represent in this situation?

     (A) The fixed cost to set up the lemonade stand
     (B) The cost per each cup of lemonade sold
     (C) The total number of cups of lemonade sold
     (D) The revenue from setting up the lemonade stand

 8. The linear function f(x) = kx + b has constants k and b. What is the y-
    intercept of the function based on the values of x and f(x) in the table
    below?

                                  x     f (x)
                                 16      −28
                                 21      −38


     (A) 2
     (B) 4
     (C) 6
     (D) 10

 9. John has $20 to spend on his school lunch each week. A meal costs $3
     and a milk costs $0.50. If he purchases one meal each day on Monday
     through Friday, what is the greatest number of milks he could
     purchase that week given his budget (note that sales tax is not applied
     to his purchases)?

     (A) 3
     (B) 7
     (C) 10
     (D) 20

10. In store A, 3 out of every 4 items are sold at a discount. In store B, 1
     out of every 3 items is sold at a discount. If each store has 240 total
     items it is selling (both full price and at a discount), how many more
     discounted items will there be in store A than in store B?

     (A) 80
     (B) 100
     (C) 120
     (D) 480

Solutions
 1. (C) Take the x cups of food and multiply it by the y days the cat eats
     it:



 2. (A) Take the original expression and isolate the time variable, T, to
      better understand what would happen:

      So, if the rate increases while the distance remains the same, the
      fraction will decrease because the denominator will increase.
    Therefore, the time will decrease.

3. (B) In the function C(y) = 2.00 + 0.08y, C represents the price of the
    gallon of milk, and y is the number of years after 2000. So, 2.00
    would be the price of the milk in the year 2000, and each year after
    2000, the price of a gallon of milk would increase by 8 cents. Thus,
    the number 0.08 represents the average yearly increase in the price
    per gallon of milk.

4. (D) Since there is just 1 state, Nebraska, that does not have a
    bicameral legislature, there are 49 states that do have a bicameral
    legislature. To find the fraction, divide the number of states with a
    bicameral legislature, 49, by the total of 50 states:

5. (B) Tabitha makes $10 for each of the H hours a week she works and
    $20 for each of the C cell phones she sells in a week. Put this together
    to find her total salary for the week:

6. (D) Set up a series of equations to solve for the number of small
    popcorns sold. First, the sum of the large popcorns, which we can
    label L, and the small popcorns, which we can label S, is 150. In
    equation form, it is:

    The total revenue from the popcorn sales, $570, is equivalent to what
    we get when multiplying 5 by the number of large popcorns and 3 by
    the number of small popcorns:
    Now, use substitution to solve for the number of small popcorns:



    Plug this in to the second equation:
    So, 90 small popcorns were sold.
    This problem can also be solved using elimination. Take the two
    equations L + S = 150 and 5L + 3S = 570. Since we are solving for S,
    eliminate the L by multiplying L + S = 150 by −5 and adding this to


    the other equation:

7. (A) In the function C(x) = .25x + 20, if zero cups of lemonade were
    sold, there would still be a cost of $20 to operate the stand. Since this
    cost is fixed, no matter how many cups of lemonade are sold, the $20
    would be the cost to set up the lemonade stand.

8. (B) Since the function is a line, you can start by solving for the slope
    of the line using the ordered pairs presented in the table: (16, −28)
    and (21, −38).




    Since the function, f(x) = kx + b, is already in slope-intercept form,
    we now know that −2 is the slope and can be plugged in for the

    constant k:
    Now, we can solve for the constant b, which corresponds to the y-
    intercept of the function. Do so by plugging in an ordered pair for x



    and f(x). Let us use (16, −28) since it is smaller:
      Therefore, the y-intercept of the function is 4.

 9. (C) If John purchases 1 meal each day on Monday through Friday, he
     will purchase a total of 5 meals. The cost for 5 meals is:

      He then has 20 − 15 = 5 dollars remaining to purchase milks. Take
      the $5 and divide it by $0.50 to see the maximum number of milks he
      could purchase:
      Thus, John can purchase a maximum of 10 milks that week given his
      budget.

10. (B) Since there are 240 items in store A, find out how many items are
     being sold at a discount by multiplying by the total number of
      items:

      For the discounted items in store B, do a similar calculation:



      Then, find the difference in the number of discounted items for each
      store by subtracting:



Practice Drill #3—Word Problems and Function Interpretation
(If timing, take about 12 minutes to complete.)
 1. If 2x + k = 2(x + 3), what is the value of the constant k?

     (A) 2
     (B) 3
     (C) 5
     (D) 6
2. The price of a painting, p, is modeled by the equation p = 800 + 20y, in
   which y is the number of years after the painting was created. What is
   the most logical interpretation of the number 20 in the equation?

   (A) The price of the painting in y years
   (B) The initial price of the painting
   (C) The yearly increase in the painting’s price
   (D) The change in the painting’s price over a 20-year period

3. Rental of a video game costs a flat fee of $20 plus $3 for each hour the
   video game is used. Which equation provides the total cost, C, of
   using the game for H hours?

   (A) C(H) = 3H − 20
   (B) C(H) = H + 60
   (C) C(H) = 3H + 20
   (D) C(H) = 20H + 3




4. The table above provides pairs of values for x and y. Which equation
   below correctly shows the linear relationship between these values?

   (A)
   (B)
   (C)
   (D)
5. A baker sells cupcakes for $3 each and cookies for $2 each. If he sells
   a total of 200 cookies and cupcakes and the total amount of revenue
   from selling the cookies and cupcakes is $460, which set of equations
   could be used to solve for x cupcakes sold and y cupcakes sold?

   (A) x + y = 460 and 2x + 3y = 200
   (B) x + y = 200 and 3x + 2y = 460
   (C) 3x + 2y = 200 and x + y = 460
   (D) x × y = 200 and (3x) × (2y) = 460

6. A discount bookstore sells books for $6 each and magazines for $3
   each. In a given week, the store sells a combined total of 750
   books/magazines and makes a total of $3,600 from the book and
   magazine sales. In that week, how many magazines were sold?

   (A) 300
   (B) 450
   (C) 900
   (D) 10,800

7. A house is initially purchased for $150,000 and increases in value by
   $3,500 each year. Which of these expressions gives the price, P, of the
   house t years after purchase?

   (A) P = 3, 500 + 150, 000t
   (B) P = 3, 500t − 150, 000
   (C) P = 150, 000 + 3, 500t
   (D) P = 150, 000 − 3, 500t

8. In the following equation, 3x + 5 = 3x + k, what must be true about the
    constant k equal in order for there to be no real solutions for x?

   (A) k = 3
   (B) k = 5
   (C) k ≠ 3
   (D) k ≠ 5
 9. In an art class, a bin contains C crayons and M markers. If there are
     twice as many markers as crayons, and the total number of markers
     and crayons in the bin is 90, which of these sets of equations could be
     used to solve for C and M?

     (A)

     (B)

     (C)

     (D)

10. Chris took a bike ride through the hills near his home. On his ride, he
     either went uphill or downhill. His total ride was 30 miles and took
     1.6 hours. If half of the distance of his journey was uphill and the
     other half of the distance was downhill, and his downhill speed was an
     average of 25 mph, what was his average uphill speed?

     (A) 10 mph
     (B) 12 mph
     (C) 15 mph
     (D) 18 mph

Solutions
 1. (D) Simplify the expression so that the k is isolated to see its value:




      Subtract the 2x from both sides →
2. (C) The price of the painting is found with the equation p = 800 + 20y.
    At the year of the painting’s creation, y equals zero and p will be 800.
    After one year, the price of the painting will increase by 20. So, the
    20 represents the yearly increase in the painting’s price.

3. (C) There is a flat fee of $20, so no matter how many hours the video
    game is rented, there will be a constant $20 fee. Then, for each hour
    the game is rented, there is a charge of $3. The total cost is found by
    adding the flat fee of $20 to the cost of $3 for each hour it is rented:


4. (A) Save yourself time on this question by recognizing that all the
    answer choices are written in slope-intercept form, and have different
    y-intercepts. Fortunately, we can determine the y-intercept of the
    function by looking at the table: when the x value is 0, the y value is
    −2.

    Therefore, the only plausible option is choice (A):

5. (B) The total number of cupcakes sold is 200, so this equation fits the
    problem:



    The total revenue is $460, and each of the x cupcakes sells for $3
    each, and each of the y cupcakes sells for $2 each. Therefore, this
    equation fits the situation:

6. (A) Let’s use the variable B for books and M for magazines and create
    equations to model what is described. First, there are a total of 750
    books and magazines sold:

    Next, the total revenue from selling books at $6 each and magazines
    at $3 each is $3,600:
    Now, we can use elimination to solve for the magazines sold. Take
    the first equation and multiply it by −6 so that the B term can be


    eliminated, then add it to the second equation:
    Then, solve for the number of magazines:




    This can also be solved using substitution. Take the two equations B
    + M = 750 and 6B + 3M = 3, 600. Since we want M, substitute for B

    so everything is in terms of M:
    Plug this in for B into the other equation:




7. (C) The price starts at 150,000 (i.e., when the years are zero), and each
    year it goes up by $3,500. So, the y-intercept of the function is
    150,000, and the slope (yearly change) of the function is 3,500.
    Putting this in slope-intercept form, P = 150, 000 + 3, 500t is correct
    even though the y-intercept comes first in the expression.

8. (D) In order for there to be no solutions, the equation must result in
    something that is not true for any value of x. If we simplify the
    equation, we can see that if k is 5, there will be infinitely many
    solutions:

    Subtract 3x from both sides →
      So, if k ≠ 5, there would not be any solutions.

 9. (A) The total number of markers and crayons in the class is 90, which
     can be represented by this equation:



      For the next equation, be careful to not just read it left to right. The
      correct representation of the phrase “there are twice as many markers
      as crayons” is:
      Plug in a sample for M and a sample for C to see that this makes
      sense. If M is 40 and C is 20 then M = 2C. These two equations
      together correspond to choice (A).
10. (C) Since half of the distance of the journey is uphill and the other
     downhill, 15 miles would be uphill, and 15 downhill. Let us first find
     how long it took to make the downhill journey—this portion would be
     at 25 mph. Plug it into the equation D = RT and solve for time.




      Now that we know that .6 of an hour was spent going downhill, we
      know that 1.6 − .6 = 1 hour was spent going uphill. Since this part of
      the journey is 15 miles, the average uphill speed will simply be 15
      miles per hour.

Algebra—Lines and Slope
Slope Formula
The slope of a line represents its vertical increase, rise, divided by the
horizontal increase, run. Calculate the slope between two points, (x1, y1)
and (x2, y2), by plugging the coordinates of the points into this formula:
    Example
 What is the slope of a line that has the points (8, 3) and (5, 1)?

    Solution
 Be consistent in which point is point 2 and which point is point 1. In this
 case, let’s use (8, 3) as point 2 and (5, 1) as point 1—doing so will make for
 an easier calculation that does not involve negative values. So, y2 = 3, y1 =
 1, x2 = 8, and x1 = 5.




 Thus, the slope of this line would be .

 Practice

What is the slope of a line with the points (4, 3) and (6, 1)?
What is the slope of a line with the points (2.5, 7) and (−4, −8)?
Consider a line in the xy-coordinate plane in which to get from point A to
point B, one must go up +5 units vertically and go over +3 units horizontally.
What is the slope of this line?

 Solutions




The “rise” of the line is +5 units and the “run” of the line is +3 units. So, the

slope is the rise divided by the run:

 Slope-Intercept Form of a Line
In order to graph a line, put its equation in slope-intercept form:




   Example 1

What is the slope and y-intercept of a line with the equation y = 5x − 7?

   Solution

The equation is already in slope-intercept form, so just match up the
numbers in the equation to their corresponding values.




So, the slope of this line is 5, and the y-intercept of the line is −7.

   Example 2
What is the equation of the line with the graph below?
   Solution
The line intersects the y-axis at (0, 1), making this point the y-intercept. The
line “rises” 2 units for every 1 unit it “runs,” giving a slope of 2. So, the
equation for the line is:

Overlapping and Intersecting Lines

Lines that have equivalent equations, although in different forms, will
overlap one another. For example, y = 3x + 4 and 2y = 6x + 8 overlap since
the second equation is simply two times the first equation.
   Lines that meet at a single point intersect one another. For example, y =
2x + 3 and y = −2x + 1 will intersect in the xy-coordinate plane when
graphed:

Parallel and Perpendicular Lines
Lines that are parallel to one another will have the same slope, but different
y-intercepts—they will never intersect or overlap one another. For example,
the lines with the equations           and             are parallel to one
another:




Perpendicular lines intersect at a right angle (90 degrees) and have slopes
that are negative reciprocals of one another (i.e., you filp the fraction and
change the sign.) For example, if one line has a slope of 3, the line
perpendicular to it will have a slope of . Consider two perpendicular
lines:             and y = 2x + 2.
    Their graph in the xy-coordinate plane would be as follows:
 Practice

What is the slope of a line with the equation y = −3x + 8?
What is the y-intercept of a line with the equation y = 2x + 5?
What is the slope of a line with the equation 2y = 3x + 4?
What is the y-intercept of a line with the equation y − 3 = 2x + 1?
If the slope of a line is 4, what is the slope of a line parallel to it?
If a line has the equation y = 5x − 4, what is the slope of a line perpendicular
 o it?
Would the following sets of lines overlap, intersect, be parallel, or be
perpendicular to each other?
   (A) y = 2x + 9 and y = 2x − 4
   (B)               and y = x − 3
  (C) y = 2x and
  (D) y = 4x − 1 and y = 3x + 2

 Solutions

−3.
5.
Divide both sides of the equation by 2 to put it in slope-intercept form.



    Now that it is in slope-intercept form, find the slope: .
Put the equation in slope-intercept form to determine the y-intercept.


Now that it is in slope-intercept form, you can see that the y-intercept is 4.
Parallel lines have the same slopes as one another, so it would just be 4.
The current line has a slope of 5, so take the negative reciprocal of 5:



Keep in mind that the negative reciprocals have a product of −1.

  7A. These lines have the same slope and different y-intercepts, so they are
      parallel.
  7B. The first equation can be simplified to look like the second equation:



         Since the lines have equivalent equations, they overlap.
  7C. The product of the slopes of the two lines is −1.



           Therefore, they are perpendicular to each other.
 7D. The two lines have different slopes and different y-intercepts. They
     will intersect each other in the xy-coordinate plane.


                                 SAT Math Strategy
  Memorize the key slope and line formulas so you can avoid being intimidated.

  SAT Math questions using the above concepts will often integrate multiple ideas about slope
  and lines. If you know the formulas well, you can write out what you need to think through
  the problem.



   Example 1

     If ax + by = 5 is a line in the xy-coordinate plane in which a and b are
     constants, which of the following expresses the slope of the line?

     (A) a
     (B)
     (C)
     (D) 5

   Solution

Do not let yourself be intimidated by the unusual formatting presented in
the problem.
   Remember the fundamental concept:
        Slope-intercept form is y = mx + b.

So, take the equation and put it in slope-intercept form to find the slope of
the line:




So, the correct answer is (B),
   Example 2




Given that the relationship between a and b is linear, what is the value of x
in the table above?

Fill in: _____________

   Solution

The information is presented in a table instead of the usual (x, y) style.
Since the problem states that the relationship between a and b is linear, the
slope of the line will be constant. We can treat a as we would normally treat
x and treat b as we would normally treat y. If we find the slope of the line
between two points, it will be the same as it would be for two different
points on the line. Let’s take the point (13, 4) and (10, 3) to see what the

slope of the line would be:

We can then set up an equation to solve for the unknown value of x. The
slope of will be the same if we pick a different set of points. So, let’s pick
(4, 1) and (x, 2) and set it equal to so that we can solve for x:




Practice Drill—Lines and Slope
(If timing, take about 12 minutes to complete.)
 1. Which of the following equations represents a line in the xy-coordinate
    plane with a y-intercept of 6 and a slope of −3?
   (A) y = 3x + 6
   (B) y = 6x − 3
   (C) y = 6x + 3
   (D) y = −3x + 6

2. In the xy-plane, which of these linear equations has a y-intercept of 12?

   (A) y = 4x + 12
   (B) 12y = 4x − 1
   (C) y = 4x − 12
   (D) 12 + y = 4x

3. A linear equation in the xy-plane intercepts the y-axis at −3. For every
   2 units the y-coordinate of the line increases, the x-coordinate
   decreases by 7 units. Which of the following is the correct equation
   for this line?

   (A)
   (B)
   (C)
   (D)
4. Consider the graph of the line above as graphed in the xy-coordinate
   plane. What is the value of b if the line is presented in the equation y =
   mx + b, in which both m and b are constants?

    (A) 4
    (B) 8
    (C) −2
    (D) −

5. What is the slope of a line with the equation 5x + 4y = 2?

    (A)
    (B)
    (C)
    (D) 2
6. For the equation              what is the x-intercept?

   (A) −8
   (B)
   (C) 3
   (D) 6

7. Two lines are graphed in the xy-plane. The lines have the same slope
   and different y-intercepts. How many solution(s) would the equations
   represented by this pair of lines have?

   (A) None
   (B) One
   (C) Two
   (D) Infinite

8. Which of these represents a linear equation in the xy-plane that has the
   points (5, 17) and (2, 5)?

   (A) y = −4x − 3
   (B) y = −3x + 4
   (C) y = 4x − 3
   (D) y = 3x + 4
 9. The above graph is represented by which of these sets of equations?

     (A)

     (B)

     (C)

     (D)


10. Which of the following equations has a slope perpendicular to the slope
    of a line with the equation y = ax + b, given that a and b are constants?
     (A)
     (B) y = −ax + 2b
     (C)
     (D) y = −bx − 2a

Solutions
 1. (D) Use the slope-intercept form of a line, and plug in the value for the
     slope, m, and the y-intercept, b.



 2. (A) When a line is written in slope-intercept form, the y-intercept
     corresponds to the constant b. The only option that has positive 12 for
     b is choice (A).



 3. (C) From the description of the line in the problem, we can determine
     the line’s slope. The line decreases horizontally 7 units for every 2
     units it increases vertically. Therefore, the slope of the line will be
                . The only option that has      for its slope is choice (C).

 4. (B) The line intersects the y-axis at the point (0, 8). Therefore, the y-
     intercept of the line is 8.

 5. (C) Put the line in slope-intercept form in order to determine the slope
     of the line:




     So, the slope of the line is
 6. (D) This is an easy question to misread—you are asked to find the x-
     intercept, not the y-intercept. The x-intercept is the point at which the
     line intersects the x-axis; for this to happen, the y value at the point
     must be zero. So, plug zero in for y and see what the value of x is:




 7. (A) Lines that have the same slope and different y-intercepts run
     parallel to one another. At no point will they intersect, so the answer
     is “none.”

 8. (C) Looking ahead to the answers, all of the choices have different
     values for the line’s slope. So, calculate the slope of the line with the
     given information and see which of the options matches:



      The only one of the lines that has 4 as its slope is choice (C), y = 4x −
      3.

 9. (B) Fortunately, the different options given have different y-intercepts.
     So you can save time in solving this by identifying the y-intercepts of
     the two lines and then matching them with a choice. The two y-
     intercepts are 5 and −4, and the only option that has both of those

      values as y-intercepts is choice (B):

10. (A) Since the equation of the line is already in slope-intercept form,
     we can see that its slope is a. We then can take the negative reciprocal
     of a to get the slope of a line perpendicular to it:

      The only option that has      as its slope is choice (A).
Advanced Math
This section contains comprehensive review and strategies for all of the
concepts below:

Polynomials and Factoring
       Polynomial Manipulation
       Common Factoring Patterns

Exponents and Roots
       Exponent Rules
       Problems with Exponents and Roots

Solving Quadratic Equations
       Factoring Quadratic Equations
       Square Root Method
       Quadratic Formula
       Completing the Square
       Plugging in the Answers
       Undefined Functions
       Extraneous Solutions
       Synthetic Division

Zeros, Parabolas, and Polynomial Graphing
       Zeros of a Function
       Parabola Graphing
       Function Transformations
       Visualizing Polynomial Graphs

Function Interpretation and Manipulation
       Putting Variables in Terms of Other Variables
       Identifying Constants
        Interpreting Functions


Polynomials and Factoring
Polynomial Manipulation
The SAT Math section will have you simplify polynomial expressions using
addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division. How should you
approach these types of problems?
    Students typically miss polynomial simplification problems not because
of their mathematical difficulty, but because of careless mistakes, like with
manipulating negative signs.


                                 SAT Math Strategy
  When simplifying polynomials, write out all your steps to avoid making careless errors.



   Example
(−2x2 + 3x + 1) − (x2 + x + 2) is equivalent to which of these expressions?

     (A) x2 + 3x − 1
     (B) −x2 + 3x + 1
     (C) −3x2 + 2x − 1
     (D) −3x2 − 2x − 1

   Solution

Combine the x2 components, the x components, and the numerical
components in order to simplify. Write out all your steps to avoid careless
errors.
 Remove the parentheses, and distribute the −1 throughout the second half of
 the expression:



 Now, group like terms together to simplify:




 This corresponds to answer choice (C).

 Practice

 Simplify the following expressions.

2x + 6x − 9x
3x2 − 4x2
2x2 − x + x2
3x3 − 2x + x3 + 4x
8x4 + 2(x2 − 3x4)
3(4x2 − 2x) − 2(3x2 + 5)
x(−x + 4) − 2x(x + 3)

 Solutions
2x + 6x − 9x → 8x − 9x → −x
3x2 − 4x2 → −x2
2x2 − x + x2 → (2x2 + x2) − x → 3x2 − x
3 x3 − 2x + x3 + 4x →
(3 x3 + x3) + (− 2x + 4x)→
4 x3 + 2x
8 x4 + 2(x2 − 3 x4)→
8 x4 + 2 x2 − 6 x4→
(8 x4 − 6 x4) + 2 x2 →
2 x4 + 2 x2
3(4x2 − 2x) − 2(3x2 + 5) →
12x2 − 6x − 6x2 − 10 →
(12x2 − 6x2) − 6x − 10 →
6x2 − 6x − 10
x(−x + 4) − 2x(x + 3) →
−x2 + 4x − 2x2 − 6x →
(−x2 − 2x2) + (4x − 6x) →
−3x2 − 2x

 Common Factoring Patterns
 Since the SAT primarily evaluates your skill in problem solving and pattern
 recognition, as opposed to evaluating your skill in doing tedious
 calculations, memorize these common factoring patterns so that you can
 solve the problems most efficiently.


                                  SAT Math Strategy
    The SAT math consistently has problems in form that can be easily factored. Be on the
    lookout for common factoring patterns.



 Square of Binomial (with Plus Sign)



    Example



 Difference of Squares
    Example



 Square of Binomial (with Negative Sign)



    Example



 Sum of Cubes



    Example



 Difference of Cubes



   Example



 Practice
 Write the following expressions in factored form.
n2 + 2n + 1 = ?
a2 − 14a + 49 = ?
y2 − 16 = ?
4x2 − 9y2 = ?
27 − n3 = ?
9x2 − 25y2 = ?

125a3 + 64b3 = ?

 Solutions
n2 + 2n + 1 = (n + 1)(n + 1)
a2 − 14a + 49 = (a − 7)(a − 7)
y2 − 16 = (y + 4)(y − 4)
4x2 − 9y2 = (2x)2 − (3y)2 = (2x + 3y)(2x − 3y)
27 − n3 = →
a3 − b3 = (a − b)(a2 + ab + b2) →
33 − n3 = (3 − n)(9 + 3n + n2)
9 x2 − 25 y2 = (3x)2 − (5y)2 = (3x + 5y)(3x − 5y)



(a + b)(a2 − ab + b2) = a3 + b3
125a3 + 64b3 = (5a)3 + (4b)3 →
a3 + b3 = (a + b)(a2 − ab + b2) →
(5a + 4b)(25a2 − 20ab + 16b2)


 Practice Drill—Polynomials and Factoring
 (If timing, take about 12 minutes to complete.)

Which of the following is equivalent to 3n(n2 + 2n − 1)?

(A) 3n3 + 6n2 − 3n
(B) 3n2 + 6n − 3
(C) 3n3 + 6n2 + 3n
(D) 3n6 + 6n4 − 3n2

x3 + 6x2 + 9x
Which of the following is equivalent to the above expression?

(A) x(x + 3)(x − 3)
(B) (x + 3)3
(C) x(x + 3)2
(D) (x + 3)(x + 3)

x2 + 12x = −36 is equivalent to which of the following?

(A) (x + 6) = (x − 6)
(B) x(x + 12 + 36) = 0
(C) (x + 6)2 = 0
(D) (x − 6)2 = 4

Which of the following expresses the result when x3 + x is subtracted from
3x3 + 2x2?

(A) 2x3 + 2x2 − x
(B) 4x3 + 2x2 + x
(C) −2x3 − 2x2 + x
(D) 4x3 + 2x2 − x

The expression −(x2 + 2)(−x − 1) is equivalent to which of the following?

(A) x3 − x2 + 2x − 2
(B) x3 + 2x2 − x − 2
(C) x3 + x2 + 2x + 2
(D) −x3 − x2 + 2x + 1
(x + y2)(−x − y2)
Which of the following options is an equivalent form of the expression
above?

(A) x2 − 2x y2 + y4
(B) −x2 − 2x y2 − y4
(C) 2x2 − x y2 − 4y4
(D) −x2 − y4

          is equivalent to which of the following, given that x ≠ 3?

(A)
(B)
(C)
(D)
 Fill-In Practice: Write your answer in the underlined blank under each
 question.

For the function f(x) = (2x − 10)2, what is the value of f(13)?
Answer: ________

If            , what is the value of ?

Answer: ________

If                  , what is the value of (x + 3) if (x + 3) > 0?

Answer: ________

 Solutions
     1. (A)
    3n(n2 + 2n − 1) →
    Distribute the 3n →
    3n3 + 6n2 − 3n

2. (C)
   x3 + 6 x2 + 9x→
   Factor out an x →
   x(x2 + 6x + 9)→
   Factor the part in parentheses →
   x(x + 3)(x + 3) → x (x + 3)2

3. (C)
   x2 + 12x = − 36 →
   x2 + 12x + 36 = 0 →
   (x + 6)(x + 6) = 0 → (x + 6)2 = 0

4. (A) Be careful to put this in the correct order. It should look like this:
   (3x3 + 2x2) − (x3 + x) →
   3x3 + 2x2 − x3 − x →
   2x3 + 2x2 − x

5. (C)
   −(x2 + 2)(− x − 1) →
   FOIL the parts within the parentheses →
   −(− x3 −x2 − 2x − 2) →
   Distribute the −1 →
   x3 + x2 + 2x + 2

6. (B)
   (x + y2)(−x − y2) →
   FOIL the expression →
   −x2 − x y2 − x y2 + y4→
   −x2 − 2x y2 − y4

7. (D) Make each fraction have a common denominator and then add
   them together.
8. (256)
   f(x) = (2x − 10)2 →
   f(13) = (2(13) − 10)2 →
   f(13) = (26 − 10)2 →
   f(13) = 162 = 256

9.
10. (2) Recognize that the denominator is the square of (x + 3), and this




    will be much easier to solve:




    Cross multiply to bring the values to the numerator →
    4 = (x + 3)2 →
    Take the square root of both sides →
    2=x+3
    Fortunately, we don’t need to worry about imaginary solutions since
    the value of (x + 3) is greater than zero.
    If you do not see the pattern, you can also solve this by finding the
    value of x:




    Since (x + 3) must be greater than zero, the only possible solution for
    x is −1. Plugging this in to the expression gives us the same answer of
    2: (x + 3) → −1 + 3 = 2
 Advanced Math—Exponents and Roots

 Exponent Rules
 Memorize these exponent rules that are frequently tested on the SAT Math:




 Practice
 Write these expressions in simplified, alternative forms.
a2 a6 = ?




b−4 = ?
(n3)4 = ?
(x2 x3)2 = ?




 Solutions
a2 a6 = a(2+6) = a8
(n3)4 = n(3×4) = n12




Bring the denominator up to the top since it has a negative exponent →
→ a3




 Problems with Exponents and Roots
 SAT Math problems that involve exponents and roots will often ask you to
 integrate multiple concepts to arrive at a solution.

      Example
 If          and x is positive, what is x in terms of y?

       (A) y = x3
       (B)
       (C)
       (D) x = y3

      Solution
 When a problem asks you to put x in terms of y, it means that you should
 have x by itself and an expression in terms of y on the other side. So, we
should isolate the x variable to arrive at a solution:
Take each side to the −3 power to get a simple x →




The SAT Math heavily emphasizes pattern recognition and does not
emphasize tedious calculations. As a result, you will frequently find that
problems involving exponents and roots will involve simple numbers and
their exponential values and roots. Memorizing these equivalences will save
you time.


                                SAT Math Strategy
  Memorize the values of simple numbers to different powers to more easily recognize patterns.



x0 = 1 Anything to the zero power is simply one. 10 = 1 20 = 1 100
=1



21 = 2 Anything to the 1st power is simply itself. 31 = 3 201 = 20
(−5)1 = −5
   Example 1

If 2(x−5) = 8, what is the value of x?

     (A) 4
     (B) 5
     (C) 7
     (D) 8

   Solution

Use your knowledge of the exponential values of 2 to see a shortcut. Since
23 = 8, simply set the exponent of 2 equal to 3 to solve for x:

So, choice (D) is correct. Alternatively, you could work your way
backwards from the answer choices. When you plug in choice (D), you will
also arrive at the correct answer:
Your knowledge of the exponential values of 2 will also help you quickly
see the correct answer when you solve by plugging in the answer choices.

   Example 2

                        x                           f(x)
                        1                            1
                        2                            4
                        3                            9
                        4                            16


In the table above, which of the following defines the function f(x)?

     (A) f(x) = x + 3
     (B) f(x) = x2
     (C) f(x) = −x2
     (D) f(x) = x3

   Solution
Use your knowledge of the exponential values of simple numbers to
recognize the pattern.
 Choice (B), f(x) = x2, therefore correctly models this relationship.

 Practice Drill—Exponents and Roots
 (If timing, take about 12 minutes to complete.)

Which of these expressions is equivalent to        ?

(A)
(B)
(C)
(D)

If 3 x2 − 27 = 0, and x > 0, what is the value of x?

(A) 1
(B) 2
(C) 3
(D) 4



What is the value of f(2) in the function above?

(A)
(B)
(C)
(D) 8
If         , what is f(9)?

(A)
(B)
(C) 1
(D) 3

If x is positive, which expression is equivalent to        ?

(A) 3x
(B) 3 x2
(C) 6 x2
(D) 9 x3

                   x                              f(x)
                    1                                 2
                    2                                 5
                    3                                 10
                    4                                 17
                    5                                 26


Based on the values in the table above, which of the following correctly
expresses the value of f(x)?

(A) f(x) = x + 1
(B) f(x) = x2
(C) f(x) = x3
(D) f(x) = x2 + 1
Consider the expression above, in which x and y are both positive, and a and
b are positive constants. Which of the following would be an equivalent form
of the expression?

(A)

(B)

(C)
(D)
 Fill-In Practice: Write your answer in the underlined blank under each
 question.



Given that x > 0, what is the value of x in the above equation?
Answer: ________

If            , what is the value of x4 y2?

Answer: ________

If       , what is   ?

Answer: ________

 Solutions

     1. (D)




     2. (C)
       3 x2 − 27 = 0 →
   3 x2 = 27 →
   x2 = 9 →
   x=3
    Alternatively, you could have tried plugging in the answer choices to
    the original equation.

3. (A)




4. (B)




5. (B)


   Take the cube root of both 27 and x6 →
   = 3 x2

6. (D) Try plugging some sample values into the answer choices to
   determine the answer. When you try the first ordered pair, (1, 2),
   choices (B) and (C) can be eliminated. When you try the next ordered
   pair, (2, 5), choice (A) can be eliminated. Only choice (D), f(x) = x2 +
   1, correctly models the function.
7. (C) On a problem like this, it can be helpful to look ahead to the
   answers to have a sense of what the answer might look like. It appears
   we want a solution that has only the x values on either the numerator
   or denominator and only the y values on the opposite side. With that



    in mind, simplify the expression:




8. (3)




9. (25)


   Flip both sides →
   x2 y = 5 →
   Square both sides to make it the desired expression →
   x4 y2 = 25

10. (2)


   Square both sides →




   Take the fifth root of 32 →
Advanced Math—Solving Quadratic Functions
Factoring Quadratic Equations
If a quadratic function can be easily factored to identify the solutions, use
factoring to solve.

   Example 1


What are the solutions for x in the equation above?

   Solution
Factor the expression to solve for the solutions.




With the equation in this form, you can identify which values of x will
make the expression zero:




So, x could equal 4 or 5.

   Example 2



What are the solutions for x in the equation above?

   Solution
 Even though this equation is not as obviously factorable as the previous
 example, with a little bit of manipulation you can get it in a factorable form:

 Divide both sides by 3 →




 Factor the expression →



 Based on this, the two values that would be solutions are 2 and −1, since
 either value if plugged in for x would make the entire expression equal to
 zero.

 Practice
 Use factoring to find the solutions to the equations.

x2 − 6x + 8 = 0
x2 − 10x + 21 = 0
x2 − 6x − 16 = 0
x3 − 4x = 0
x3 + 5 x2 + 6x = 0

 Solutions

x2 − 6x + 8 = 0 →
(x − 4)(x − 2) = 0 →
x = 4 or x = 2

x2 − 10x + 21 = 0 →
(x − 7)(x − 3) = 0 →
x = 7 or x = 3

x2 − 6x − 16 = 0 →
(x − 8)(x + 2) = 0 →
Solutions: 8, −2

x3 − 4x = 0 →
x(x2 − 4) = 0 →
x(x + 2)(x − 2) = 0
Solutions are 0, −2, or 2

x3 + 5 x2 + 6x = 0 →
x(x2 + 5x + 6) = 0 →
x(x + 3)(x + 2) = 0
Solutions are 0, −3, or −2

 Square Root Method
 If a quadratic equation does not have an x term, you may want to use the
 square root method—take the square root of both sides of the equation to
 arrive at the solution(s). The positive and negative cases will be solutions.

    Example



 What are the solutions for x in the equation above?

    Solution
 This equation lacks an x term, so we can use the square root method to
 solve:
 Practice
 Use the square root method to solve these equations.

x2 = 81
y2 − 64 = 0
(x − 3)2 = 25

 Solutions

x2 = 81→




y2 − 64 = 0 →




(x − 3)2 = 25→



Then, set up two equations to solve for the potential values of x:


or


So, the solutions are 8 and −2.

 Quadratic Formula
An equation with constants a, b, and c and a variable x that is written in the
form ax2 + bx + c = 0 may be solved using the quadratic formula:

Use the quadratic formula when factoring the equation looks challenging,
often when the x2 term has a constant other than 1 in front of it (examples: 6
x2 or    ).

     Example



What are the solutions for x in the equation above?

     Solution
The values of the constants are a = 3, b = 5, and c = −2. Plug these values
into the quadratic formula to solve for x.




So, the solutions are:



or
 Practice
3 x2 + 5x + 2 = 0
2 x2 − 5x − 7 = 0
5 x2 + 3x = 2
3 x2 + 4x − 5 = 0
How many real solutions does the equation 5 x2 − 3x + 2 = 0 have?

 Solutions
To see how many real solutions there are, find the value of the discriminant,
 .e., the component of the quadratic formula underneath the square root sign:
b2 − 4ac. If it is positive, there are two real solutions. If it is zero, there is just
one real solution. And if it is negative, there are no real solutions since you
would have to take the square root of a negative number.
In the equation 5 x2 − 3x + 2 = 0, b2 − 4ac = (−3)2 − 4(5)(2) = 9 − 40 = − 31.
So, there are zero real solutions to the equation.

 Completing the Square
 Use completing the square particularly to work with problems involving
 parabolas. Completing the square will enable you to more easily identify
 key information about the parabola. (Note—parabolas will be covered later
 in the chapter.)

     Example



 What are the values for x in the above equation?

     Solution
 Here is how you can use completing the square to solve this equation.
    First, take half of 8 (which is 4), square it, and add it to both sides of the
 equation.




 Now, you can factor the left-hand side in a squared form:



 Then, take the square root of both sides:
 Finally, solve for x:



 or



 So, x could be either 2 or −10.

 Practice
 Solve each of these using completing the square.
x2 + 6x = −8
x2 + 8x = 9
4 x2 + 3x = 1

 Solutions
x2 + 6x = −8 →
x2 + 6x + 9 = −8 + 9 →
(x + 3)2 = 1 →
x+3=±1
So, x could equal −4 or −2.

x2 + 8x = 9 →
x2 + 8x + 16 = 9 + 16 →
(x + 4)2 = 25 →
x+4=±5
So, x could equal 1 or −9.

4x2 + 3x = 1 →
Take half of    , square it, and add to both sides:




So, x could equal:


or



 Plugging in the Answers
 Try plugging in the answer choices in a quadratic equation if solving the
 problem algebraically will take longer than working backwards from the
 four options.

     Example



 What is the value of x in the equation above?

      (A) 1
      (B) 2
      (C) 3
      (D) 4

     Solution
 While this problem could be solved algebraically, it will likely save you
 time to work backwards from the answer options. Since the answers are in
 order from least to greatest, start with one of the middle options to
 minimize the potential trial and error.
 Start with 2:




 This option did not work. Since the sum was larger than , we should try
 another answer choice that will make the expression have a smaller fraction
 —this comes from having a larger denominator. So, we will next try choice


 (C), 3:


 This checks out, so choice (C), 3, is correct.

 Practice
 Use plugging in the answers to solve.

4(x − 2)2 + 2 = 2x
Which of the following is a value of x?

(A) 1
(B) 2
(C) 3
(D) 4
Which of the following is a value of x?

(A) −2
(B) −1
(C) 0
(D) 1

Which of the following is/are solutions for x in the following equation?
8x2 − 7x = x3
 I. Zero
II. One
III. Two

A) I only
B) II only
C) I and II only
D) All of the above


 Solutions

    1. 4 (x − 2)2 + 2 = 2x →
       4 (3 − 2)2 + 2 = 2(3) →
       4 (1)2 + 2 = 6 →
       6=6
           So, choice (C), 3, works.

    2.




           So, choice (B), −1, works.
 3. First, let’s try zero:
    8x2 − 7x = x3 →
    8(0)2 − 7(0) = 03 →
    0=0
     So, option I, zero, does work.
     Next, let’s try 1:
     8x2 − 7x = x3 →
     8(1)2 − 7(1) = 13 →
     8−7=1→
     1=1
     So option II, 1, does work.
     Finally, let’s try 2:
     8 x2 − 7x = x3 →
     8(2)2 − 7(2) = 23 →
     32 − 14 = 8 →
     18 ≠ 8
     So option III, 2, does NOT work. Therefore, the correct answer is
     choice (C). You could also approach this in an efficient way by
     realizing that if option III DOES work, choice (D) will have to be the
     answer since it is the only option with option III. Further, if you are
     evaluating quadratics on the calculator section, you may want to
     graph the function to more quickly identify its roots.

Undefined Functions
When a function is divided by zero, it may be undefined—that is, it will
have no solutions. If you were to divide a number like 3 by 0, it would be
undefined since it is impossible to divide 3 into zero parts.

   Example
When is this function undefined?
    Solution
 Determine the value of x that would cause the function to have zero in the
 denominator. Set the denominator equal to zero and solve for x:

 Therefore, the function is undefined when x is equal to 4.

 Practice
 Find the values of x that will make the expression undefined.




 Solutions



So, the function is undefined when x is 0.



x + 4 = 0 → x = −4
So, the function is undefined when x is −4.



x2 − 9 = 0 →
x2 = 9 → x = ± 3
So, the function is undefined when x is 3 or −3.

 Extraneous Solutions
 When dealing with equations involving roots, it is a good idea to test the
 solutions to see if they are extraneous—meaning, they do not work in the
 original equation. The reason they typically do not work is that they would
 require taking the square root of a negative number, which would result in
 an imaginary solution.

    Example



 What are the solutions for x in the equation above?

    Solution
 Start by squaring both sides to get rid of the radical sign:




 Then, simplify the equation and factor to find the potential solutions:




 So, the potential solutions are 10 and 5. Now, to be sure we don’t have any
 extraneous solutions, plug 10 and 5 back in to the original equation to see if

 they work:

 So, 10 works in the original equation. Now let’s try 5.
 The square root of 4 cannot be equal to −2 in this case, since we would need
 an imaginary number to make it work. Therefore, 5 is an extraneous
 solution and the only solution is 10.

 Practice
 Solve each of these equations for x, watching out for extraneous solutions.




 Solutions


x2 = 12 − x→
x2 + x − 12 = 0→
(x + 4)(x − 3)
So, −4 and 3 are potential solutions. Check to see if either is extraneous.



So, −4 does NOT work.



So, 3 does work.
8 and 3 are potential solutions. Check to see if either is extraneous.




8 does work.




3 does NOT work.



x − 6 = (x − 8)2 →
x − 6 = x2 − 16x + 64 →
0 = x2 − 17x + 70 →
0 = (x − 10)(x − 7)
10 and 7 are potential solutions. Check to see if either is extraneous.




So, 10 does work.




So, 7 does NOT work.
Synthetic Division
On occasion, the SAT will ask you to divide a polynomial. The easiest way
to do this is using synthetic division.

   Example 1
What is the result when 2 x2 + 5x − 3 is divided by x − 4?

   Solution
Set up the problem by taking the coefficients of the terms of the polynomial
and placing the numerical term of the divisor to the left of them like this:

Next, bring down each of the coefficients, multiplying the columns one-by-
one by the divisor 4, and create sums to see what the divided polynomial

and remainder would be:

The answer would be 2x + 13 with a remainder of         .

   Example 2
Based on the previous problem, is x − 4 a factor of 2 x2 + 5x − 3?

   Solution
For an expression to be a factor of the polynomial, you must be able to
divide the polynomial by that expression and NOT have a remainder, i.e.,
the remainder must be zero. Since there is a remainder of      when the
expression is divided, x − 4 is NOT a factor of 2 x2 + 5x − 3.

Practice
1A. What is the result when x2 + 2x − 15 is divided by x + 5?
1B. Is x + 5 a factor of x2 + 2x − 15?
2A. What is the result when 4 x2 − 3x − 5 is divided by x − 3?
2B. Is x − 3 a factor of 4 x2 − 3x − 5?

Solutions
1A.




   Therefore, the answer is x − 3.

1B. Since there was no remainder when it was divided, this is a factor of the
    expression.

2A.




   So, the result is 4x + 9 with a remainder of

2B. Since there was a remainder when it was divided, this is NOT a factor
    of the expression.


                               SAT Math Strategy
  Many SAT quadratic function problems can be solved in different ways. Use whatever
  approach is easiest for you.



   Example

If 2 x2 − 6x = 20, what are the solutions for x?

      (A) −2 or −5
     (B) −2 or 5
     (C) 2 or −5
     (D) 2 or 5

   Solution

Method 1: Factoring. If you notice that all the numbers in the problem
have 2 as a factor, you can take a 2 out of everything to simplify. Then
factoring will probably appear to be the easiest method.




The correct answer is therefore (B), −2 or 5.
Method 2: Quadratic Formula. If you do not see an easy way to factor the
equation, you can put the equation in standard form and use the quadratic
formula to solve. This can be a good approach if you are quick and careful
with your calculations.




So, x could be either
Method 3: Plug in the Answers. Look ahead to the answer choices to
notice that all of them are variations of ±2 and ±5. So, you essentially just
have four numbers to plug in to the original equation.
2(−2)2 − 6(−2) = 20 →
8 + 12 = 20
−2 works.
2(2)2 − 6(2) = 20 →
8 − 12 ≠ 20
2 does NOT work.
2(−5)2 − 6(−5) = 20 →
2(25) + 30 = 20 →
50 + 30 ≠ 20
−5 does NOT work.
2(5)2 − 6(5) = 20 →
2(25) − 30 = 20 →
50 − 30 = 20
5 does work.
If there were more numbers to plug in, this approach would have been more
difficult.

On school tests, you can often get in a rhythm with the questions you are
solving. Each question on a test or quiz may be a variation of “solve for x.”
On the SAT Math, be careful on quadratic function questions to first
understand what the question is asking, then start working on the solution.


                                SAT Math Strategy
  Do not go on autopilot with the questions—carefully consider what you are asked to do.



   Example
Variables x and y are related to each other in a quadratic function of the
form y = kx2, in which k is a constant. If y is 12 when x is 2, and y is 48
when x is 4, what is the value of y when x is 5?

     (A) 30
     (B) 45
     (C) 60
     (D) 75

   Solution
This is not a problem that can be solved in a typical fashion, like using the
quadratic formula or factoring. We must fully understand what the question
tells us.
      The variables are related to each other in an equation like y = kx2.
      x and y are variables while k is a constant.
      We have ordered pairs of values—(2, 12) and (4, 48)—that we can
      plug in to see what the constant k would be.
Given that information, let’s plug in the ordered pair (2, 12) into the
equation, since it is smaller and easier to work with than (4, 48):




So, the function in the question is y = 3 x2. We now can see what the value
of y is when x is 5:




The answer is therefore (D), 75.
 Practice Drill #1—Solving Advanced Equations
 (If timing, take about 12 minutes to complete.)

For what positive value of x is this function undefined?



(A) 1
(B) 2
(C) 3
(D) 4

If x2 − 3x − 10 = 0, for what value of x is this equation true given that x > 0?

(A) 3
(B) 4
(C) 5
(D) 6

Which of the following would be a solution to this equation?


(A) 11
(B) 18
(C) 55
(D) 121

Which of the following provides the two solutions to this equation?


(A)
(B)
(C)
(D)

x2 − 15 = x + 5
What is the product of the solutions to the above equation?

(A) −35
(B) −20
(C) 1
(D) 9



What value of y would always make the above equation true?

(A) x
(B) x2
(C) 4x
(D) 8x
 Fill-In Practice: Write your answer in the underlined blank under each
 question.

If                    , what is the solution for x?

Answer: ________

If                 , what is the solution for x?
Answer: ________

(x + b)(x + b) = x2 + 4x + 4
If the above equation has infinitely many solutions, what is the value of the
constant b?
Answer: ________

If                      , how many real solutions are there for x?

Answer: ________

 Solutions
     1. (A) For the function              to be undefined, we need a value of x
         that will make the denominator equal to zero. So, set up an equation
         to solve for the positive value of x needed:

         So, x could equal 1 or −1. Since we need a positive value of x, the
         correct answer is 1.

     2. (C) Solve this by factoring:




         So, x could be either 5 or −2. Since the answer must be positive, the
         correct answer is 5.

     3. (D) Use the square root method to solve:
4. (A) Given that there is a 3 in front of the x2 term, the quadratic




    formula will be the best way to solve this:




    and



5. (B) Simplify and factor the equation to determine the two solutions,
    then multiply them together to find their product:




    The solutions are therefore 5 or −4. The product of them is 5 × (−4) =
    − 20.

6. (A) Solve for y by simplifying the equation, then using the square root
    method:
 7. (1) Multiply the equation by (x − 3) to remove the (x − 3) from the
     denominator:




 8. (9) Simplify and use the square root method:




 9. (2) For there to be infinitely many solutions, the equation must be
     equivalent on both sides. FOIL the left-hand side to see what the
     value of b must be for this to be true.




      If b is equal to 2, both sides are equivalent, giving us infinitely many
      solutions.

10. (0) Simplify this equation to get it in standard form.
        Now, use the quadratic formula to solve:




        Since the discriminant (the             term) is negative, there will be 0
        real solutions.


 Practice Drill #2—Solving Advanced Equations
 (If timing, take about 12 minutes to complete.)

If x2 − 14x + 49 = 0, what is the value of x?

(A) 3
(B) 5
(C) 7
(D) 9

If n2 − 6n + 9 = 25, which of the following is a possible value of n − 3?

(A) 4
(B) 5
(C) 6
(D) 9

If         , what are the value(s) of x that would satisfy the equation?

(A) 1 and −6
(B) 2 and −3
(C) 3 and 0
(D) 6 and 4

What is the largest value of n that satisfies the following equation?



(A) −4
(B) −6
(C) 4
(D) 6



For what value of x is the above function f(x) undefined?

(A) −8
(B) −4
(C) 2
(D) 4

What are the solutions to the equation 5 x2 − 7x + 1 = 0?

(A)
(B)
(C)
(D)



What is the set of real solutions for the above equation?

(A) 2 only
(B) 2 and −4
(C) 4 and −2
(D) There are no real solutions.

What is the remainder when 2 x2 + 3x − 1 is divided by x − 4?

(A)
(B)
(C)
(D) 0

If           , what is the value of x?

(A) −9
(B) −5
(C) 2
(D) 11



What value of x is a solution to the equation above?

(A) 2
(B) 5
(C) 6
(D) 18

 Solutions

     1. (C) Solve by factoring:
    So, 7 is the only solution.

2. (B) Factor the expression, then use the square root method:




3. (C) Plugging and chugging would be a viable approach on this
   problem, but you can also solve it fairly easily by cross multiplying
   and then solving for x.




    So zero is a solution.
    Also, 3 is a solution because



4. (D) This is easiest to solve by plugging in the answers. Start with the
   largest choice and work your way smaller if needed:




    So, 6 works. Alternatively, keep in mind that a polynomial written in
    factored form automatically shows what the zeroes are.
5. (D) For the function                    to be undefined, the
   denominator must be zero. So, set up an equation in which just the
   denominator is equal to zero.




    So, if x equals 4, the denominator will equal zero and the function
    will be undefined.

6. (B) Use the quadratic formula to solve this equation.




7. (D) Plugging in the potential answers of 2, 4, −2, and −4 is an
   excellent way to solve the problem. You can also solve it


    algebraically:



    Now, when you plug 12 back in to the original equation, you can see
    that it does not work:
     In fact, if you notice that in the original equation it states that the
     square root of x + 4 must equal a negative number, you can stop right
     there since the least that the square root of the number could be
     would be zero. We would need imaginary numbers to arrive at a
     negative solution.

8. (A) Use synthetic division to solve:




     Take the 43 and divide it by x − 4 to get the remainder of

9. (D) Plugging in the answers will work well on this problem. Also, you
   can solve it algebraically:




10. (A) You could use plugging in the answers to solve this, but you
    could also do it algebraically.



     Divide the numerator and the denominator of the left side by 3 →
Advanced Math—Zeros, Parabolas, and
Polynomial Graphing
Zeros of a Function
The root or zero of a function is the value of x for which a function like f(x)
has a value of zero. When an equation of the function is provided, you can
identify the zeros by solving for when f(x)is 0 (i.e., finding the x-intercepts
or solutions). When a graph of the function is provided, you can identify the
zeros by looking at the values of x for which the f(x)values have coordinates
at 0.

   Example

What are the zeros of the parabola of the equation f(x) = x2 − 6x + 5 and
with the graph below?
   Solution

The first way you can find the zeros is by factoring the equation:




So, there are zeros at x values of 5 and 1 since plugging those two values in
to the function will cause the value of f(x) to be 0.
    The second way you can find the zeros is by examining the graph
above. Look at the points where the function intersects the x-axis, since the
value of f(x), or y, will be zero there. At points (1, 0) and (5, 0), the function
intersects the x-axis, so 5 and 1 are zeros of the function.

Practice
What are the zeros of the function y = (x + 3)(x − 5)?
What are the zeros of the function f(x) = x2 + 4x − 12?
What are the zeros of the function graphed below?




What are the zeros of f(x) = x(x − 1)(x + 2)(x − 9)?

 Solutions
 1. Since the function is already in factored form, it is easy to identify
    which values of x would make y have a value of zero. If x is either −3
    or 5, y will be zero. Therefore, the zeros are −3 and 5.

 2. Factor the equation to identify the zeros:




      So, the zeros are at −6 and 2.

 3. Since the function does not intersect the x-axis, there are no points at
    which y will be zero. Therefore, there are NO real zeros in the
    function.

 4. Examine the equation to determine the values of x that will make f(x)
    = 0. Fortunately, the equation is already factored, f(x) = x(x − 1)(x +
    2)(x − 9), making it easier to identify the zeros. 0, 1, −2, and 9 if
    plugged in for x would all make the function equal to 0, so these
    numbers are all zeros of the function.

Parabola Graphing
A parabola is a function with a u-shaped curve that has certain properties.
Here is an example of a parabola with the equation y = 2(x − 3)2 + 1:
       The vertex form of a parabola is y = a(x − h)2 + k. In the above
       example, y = 2 (x − 3)2 + 1 is written in vertex form, with a = 2, h =
       3, and k = 1.
       The value of the constant a determines the direction of the parabola
       —if it is positive, it opens upward, and if it is negative, it opens
       downward. In the example, a is +2, so the parabola opens upward.
       The vertex (the bottom point of the u-shape) has the coordinates (h,
       k). The vertex of the parabola in the example is (3, 1).
       The x-coordinate of the vertex gives the axis of symmetry for the
       parabola. The axis of symmetry in the example is x = 3.
The SAT Math questions involving parabolas focus heavily on identify the
vertex of a parabola.
There are four major approaches to doing this.
Method 1: Identify points h and k when the parabola is in vertex form.

   Example
What is the vertex of the parabola with the equation y = 3(x − 4)2 − 7?

   Solution
Notice that the equation is already in vertex form, making it easy to identify
the vertex:




Since 4 corresponds to the h and −7 corresponds to the k, the vertex will be
(4, − 7).
Method 2: Use the formula

When a parabola is written in the form y = a x2 + bx + c, you can determine
the x-coordinate of the parabola’s vertex by using this formula:
Then, you can plug the x value back in to the original equation to solve for
the y value of the vertex.

   Example

What is the vertex of the parabola with the equation y = 4 x2 − 2x − 3?

   Solution

Find the a and b values in the equation and then plug them into the formula.

Constant a is 4 and constant b is −2. Now, plug them in:


Now that we know the x-coordinate of the vertex, we can plug this value
back into the original equation to solve for the y-coordinate of the vertex:
So, the vertex of the parabola is        .

Method 3: Identify the x value halfway between the zeros.

   Example
What is the x-coordinate of the vertex of the parabola with the equation y =
(x − 6)(x − 2)?

   Solution

The zeros of the parabola are at x-coordinates of 6 and 2. The x-coordinate
of the vertex comes halfway between these two zeros. So the x-coordinate
of the vertex will be at 4 since it is halfway between 6 and 2. Here is a
graph of the parabola to more easily visualize this:




Method 4: Identify the vertex from the graph.

   Example
What is the vertex of the parabola with the graph below?
Solution
 Look for the very bottom point of the parabola to identify the vertex. The
 parabola has a bottom at (0, 0), so the vertex of the parabola is at (0, 0):




 Practice
Does the parabola y = 3(x − 2)2 + 9 open upwards or downwards?
What is the vertex of the parabola with the equation y = 4(x − 1)2 + 6?
What is the x-coordinate of the vertex of a parabola with the equation y = (x +
4)(x − 8)?
What is the x-coordinate of the vertex of a parabola with the equation y = 3 x2
− 8x + 4?
What is the vertex of the parabola graphed below?
 Solutions
The parabola is already in the form y = a(x − h)2 + k, with 3 equalling a.
Since a is positive, the parabola will open upwards.
The parabola is in the form y = a(x − h)2 + k. From this, we can identify the
values of the constants h and k to identify the vertex.




Since the equation is already in factored form, we can identify the zeros of y
= (x + 4)(x − 8) as −4 and 8. The x-coordinate of the vertex will be the
midpoint of these two values:
Use the formula           to solve:




From the graph, we can identify that the vertex of the parabola is at its lowest
point, (−1, 2).

 Function Transformations
 It is useful on some SAT Math problems to know how changes to a
 function’s equation can impact its graph. Here are some key relationships to
 know.
      Suppose we have the function y = x2 with the graph below:
Treat h and k as constants for these rules.


Rule 1: If you transform f(x) to f(x) + k, the function will shift UP k
units.
The graph of y = x2 + 2 is this:
Rule 2: If you transform f(x) to f(x) − k, the function will shift DOWN k
units. The graph of y = x2 − 2 is this:
Rule 3: If you transform f(x) to f(x + h), the function will shift LEFT h
units.
The graph of y = (x + 2)2 is this:
Rule 4: If you transform f(x) to f(x − h), the function will shift RIGHT
h units.
The graph of y = (x − 2)2 is this:
Rule 5: If you transform f(x) to −f(x), the function will be
REFLECTED across the x-axis.
The graph of y = −x2 is this:
 Practice
If y = 3 x3, how will the graph of y = 3 x3 − 5 compare?
If y = 4 x2, how will the graph of y = 4(x + 2)2 compare?
If y = −2 x3, how will the graph of y = 2 x3 compare?
If y = 6 x2 − 5, how will the graph of y = 6(x − 1)2 − 8 compare?
If y = 2(x − 4)5 + 5, how will the graph of y = 2(x + 1)5 − 5 compare?

 Solutions
It will be shifted 5 units down.
It will be shifted 2 units to the left.
It will be reflected across the x-axis.
It will be 1 unit to the right and 3 units down.
It will be 5 units to the left and 10 units down.

 Visualizing Polynomial Graphs
 Most of the functions you will encounter on the SAT Math are lines or
 parabolas. Occasionally, there will be questions involving more advanced
 concepts about the graphs of polynomial functions. Here are some key
 things to know.

 Consider a polynomial with the term with the highest power term a xn.
       The greatest possible number of turns (changes in y direction) of this
       function will be at most n − 1.
       If the constant a is positive, the function will ultimately point
       upwards as the x values increase; if the constant a is negative, the
       function will ultimately point downwards as the x values increase.
       If the exponent n is even, the ends of the function go the same
       direction; if the exponent n is odd, the ends of the function go in
       different directions.

    Example 1

 Consider the polynomial y = x3 − 7 x2 + 7x + 15.
        How many times will the polynomial turn with respect to its y
        values?
        Will the function ultimately point upwards or downwards?
        Will the ends of the function go in the same or different directions?

    Solutions

 The greatest number exponential value in the polynomial is x3; so the
 greatest possible number of turns it can have will be 3 − 1 = 2.
     Since the coefficient of x3 is positive 1, the function will ultimately
 increase as the x values increase.
   Since the greatest exponent in the function, 3, is odd, the ends of the
function go in different directions.
   All of this is easiest to see in the graph below:




   Example 2

Consider the polynomial y = −x4 + 5 x3 − 5 x2 − 5x + 6.
       How many times will the polynomial turn with respect to its y
       values?
         Will the function ultimately point upwards or downwards?
         Will the ends of the function go in the same or different directions?

    Solution

 The greatest number exponential value in the polynomial is x4, so the
 greatest number of turns it can have will be 4 − 1 = 3.
     Since the coefficient of x4 is negative 1, the function will ultimately
 decrease as the x values increase.
     Since the greatest exponent in the function, 4, is even, the ends of the
 function go in the same direction.
     All of this is easiest to see in the graph below:




 Practice
What is the most number of turns a function of the form f(x) = a x2 can have?
Will the end values of the function f(x) = x3 go in the same or different
directions?
Will the y values in y = 4 x5 ultimately point upwards or downwards as x
 ncreases?
Will the end values of the function f(x) = x6 + 3 x5 − 2x go in the same or
different directions?
Will the y values in y = −6 x5 + 3 x4 + 7 x2 − 9 ultimately point upwards or
downwards as x increases?

 Solutions
The greatest number exponential value in the polynomial is x2; so the greatest
number of turns it can have will be 2 − 1 = 1.
Since the greatest exponent in the function, 3, is odd, the ends of the function
go in different directions.
Since the coefficient of x5 is positive 4, the function will ultimately increase
as the x values increase.
Since the greatest exponent in the function, 6, is even, the ends of the
function go in the same direction.
Since the coefficient of x5 is negative 6, the function will ultimately decrease
as the x values increase.
 Many SAT Math problems involving zeros and parabolas will require you
 to use different concepts in unique ways. Write out what is given and what
 concepts you know to see how to put it all together.


                                  SAT Math Strategy
    Integrate your knowledge about zeros, parabolas, and polynomial graphing to solve problems.



    Example 1
In the quadratic equation above, n is a constant. For what value of n will the
function intersect the x-axis only once?

     (A) −13
     (B) −12
     (C) −11
     (D) −10

   Solution
This question does not ask us to do something straightforward like
identifying the zeros or the vertex. We need to find out what value of the
constant n will make the function have only one point of intersection with
the x-axis.
    To have only one point of intersection with the x-axis, the function
should have only one zero. So, if we could factor the equation and it would
have only one zero in factored form, that would tell us what the constant
would need to be. Notice that 25 is a perfect square—the square root of it is
5. So, if we were to write the equation in factored form, it would look like
this:
When the equation is in this form, it has only ONE zero—the number 5.
Next, to identify the constant n, we can FOIL the equation to see what it
looks like in the form described by the problem.




Based on this, n is −10, choice (D). So, we were able to integrate some of
the different concepts we know about zeros to solve this problem.

   Example 2
The graph above is represented by which of the following equations?

     (A) y = x(x + 2)(x − 1)
     (B) y = x2(x + 1)(x − 2)
     (C) y = x(x − 2)(x + 1)
     (D) y = x2(x + 2)(x − 1)

   Solution
We can integrate our knowledge about zeros and polynomial graphing to
solve this problem. First, the ends of the function go in different directions,
so the largest exponential value in the function must be odd. Based on this,
we can eliminate choices (B) and (D) since when they are written in
 expanded form, the largest exponential value would be x4. Choices (A) and
 (C) could potentially work since when they are written in expanded form,
 the largest exponential value would be x3.
     Now that we know it must be either choice (A) or (C), we can identify
 the zeros of the function from the graph: they are −2, 0, and 1. This makes
 choice (A) correct with respect to zeros of the function, since the outside
 term x would work with 0, the term (x + 2) would work with − 2, and the
 term (x − 1) would work with 1. Therefore, the correct answer is (A).

 Practice Drill—Zeros, Parabolas, and Polynomial Graphing
 (If timing, take about 12 minutes to complete.)

How many zeros does the function y = x3 + 2, portrayed in the graph below,
have?




(A) 0
(B) 1
(C) 2
(D) 3

f(x) = (x + 4)(x − 6)
In the function above, what is the straight-line distance in units in the xy-
coordinate plane between the function’s zeros?

(A) 4
(B) 6
(C) 10
(D) 24

What is the y-intercept of the function y = x2 − 4?

(A) −4
(B) −2
(C) 1
(D) 4

What is the vertex in the parabola with the equation                  ?

(A) (5, 4)
(B) (−5, −4)
(C) (−5, 4)
(D) (5, −4)

What are the x-intercepts of the function f(x) = x2 − 3x − 10?

(A) −2 and 5
(B) −2 and −5
(C) 2 and 5
(D) 10 and 2
y = (x − 3)(x + 5)
The function above has a vertical axis of symmetry on which line?

(A) x = −5
(B) x = −3
(C) x = −1
(D) x = 15

Which of the following is a graph of the equation y = x2 − 3?

(A)
(B)
(C)
(D)
Which of the following functions intersects the x-axis at exactly 3 points?

(A) y = x2 − 3
(B) y = x(x − 2)(x + 3)
(C) y = (x + 4)3
(D) y = 5(x − 2)(x − 2)

What is the y value of the y-intercept of the function y = (5)x?
(A) 0
(B) 1
(C) 2
(D) 3

If f(x) = (x − 5)2 + 4 and g(x) is a line with a slope of zero that intersects f(x)
at only one point, what is the point at which the two functions intersect?

(A) (−3, −4)
(B) (−2, 5)
(C) (0, 8)
(D) (5, 4)

 Solutions

   1. (B) From the graph, you can see that the function only intersects the x-
       axis at one point. Therefore, there is just one zero of the function.

   2. (C) The function is already in factored form, so we can see that the
       zeros are at −4 and 6. So, to find the distance between the two zeros,
       just measure the difference between −4 and 6 on the x-axis. This will
       be:

   3. (A) To find the y-intercept, we must find the y value when x is equal to

        zero. So, plug zero in for x to solve:


   4. (D) Manipulate the equation to get it in the form y = a(x − h)2 + k so

        the vertex can be easily identified:



        Since the vertex corresponds to (h, k), the vertex will be (5, −4).
5. (A) Factor the function to identify the zeros—these are the same as the
    x-intercepts of the function since they are the points at which the y
    value is zero.




    Therefore, the x-intercepts are −2 and 5.

6. (C) The vertical axis of symmetry will be the line that bisects the
    parabola through the vertex. Find the x-coordinate of the vertex and
    make an equation in which every x value is equal to that point. The
    zeros of y = (x − 3)(x + 5) are 3 and −5, so the x-coordinate of the
    vertex will be halfway between them at −1. So, the vertical axis of
    symmetry will be x = −1.

7. (A) The equation is already in the form y = a(x − h)2 + k, which makes
    it easy to identify the vertex and the direction of the parabola. The
    vertex is (0, −3) and a is +1, so the parabola will open upward. The
    parabola graphed in choice (A) has this vertex and direction.

8. (B) Determine which of the four functions has three zeros:




9. (B) The y-intercept for this function is the point at which the x value is
    0. So, plug 0 in for x to see the corresponding y value.
10. (D) The two functions will intersect at the vertex of the parabola—if
     the flat, horizontal line intersected above the vertex, it would intersect
     at two points. Since the function is already in the form y = a(x − h)2 +
     k, the vertex of f(x) = (x − 5)2 + 4 can be identified as (5, 4). This is
     the point at which the functions will intersect.

Advanced Math—Function Interpretation and Manipulation

Putting Variables in Terms of Other Variables


                                 SAT Math Strategy
  When asked for the value of a variable or an expression, manipulate the equation to isolate
  that variable or expression.



   Example 1

The energy, E, of a planet in an elliptical orbit around the sun is given by
the equation



in which G is the gravitational constant, M is the mass of the sun, m is the
mass of an orbiting planet, and a is the length of the semimajor axis of the
ellipse made by the planetary orbit. What is the value of a planet’s mass in
terms of the other values?

   Solution
Typically, when you solve an equation, you find the numerical value of x or
some other variable. In a question like this, you should isolate the variable
for mass, m, to see what m is “in terms of” the other variables.
Multiply both sides by 2a →



Divide both sides by −GM →



   Example 2
What is the value of 2n − 1 in the equation below?



   Solution
As a general rule, when the SAT asks you to find the value of an expression,
there will be a straightforward way to find it by treating the expression as a
whole unit. This problem is no exception. We do not need to solve for n
individually—instead, we can manipulate the equation to isolate the
expression 2n − 1:
Factor the right side →



Multiply both sides by 3 →



Subtract (2n − 1) from both sides →




So, the value of 2n − 1 is 3.

Identifying Constants
                                 SAT Math Strategy
  Recognize that the SAT will make it easy to identify constant terms.



   Example 1
If (x + 4)2 + 5 = a x2 + bx + c, what is the sum of the constants a, b, and c?

   Solution
You do not need to use any special formulas to solve this. Just expand the
left side of the expression and simplify so you can identify the constants a,


b, and c:



So,




   Example 2



In the equation above, which of these values is displayed as a constant or
constants?

      (A) y-intercepts
      (B) x-intercepts
      (C) x-coordinate of the vertex
      (D) y-coordinate of the vertex
  Solution
In the function, we see the numbers 4 and 11 displayed as constants. What
do we know about this function based on what we have previously covered?
The zeros of the function are going to be 4 and −11. Since a zero is where
the function intersects the x-axis, we can say that the x-intercepts are
displayed as constants in the function.

Interpreting Functions


                                SAT Math Strategy
  Apply what you have already learned about algebra and graphs to interpret functions—you
  will only be tested on what is reasonable to know.



  Example 1
A company’s profit, P, for selling n products is modeled by the following
function:



How many products should the company sell to achieve its maximum
profit?

     (A) 10
     (B) 12
     (C) 15
     (D) 18

  Solution

While it would be possible to work your way backwards from the solutions,
that could be time-consuming in this case. Instead, use your knowledge of
quadratic functions to solve. The maximum of a parabola that is facing
downwards can be found at the vertex of the parabola. The n2 term is the
largest power term, and it has −10 as its coefficient, meaning the parabola
will face downwards. So, if we can find the vertex of the parabola, we can
find the x-coordinate at which the parabola is at its maximum.
    Use the formula           to find the vertex since the equation is in
standard form. The constant a will be −10, and the constant b will be 300,
and we can substitute n for x.




Thus, the number of products that should be sold to maximize the profit is
15, choice (C).

   Example 2
In the equation n x2 + m = 5 x2 + 4, there are infinitely many solutions for x.
What is the product of the constants m and n?

     (A) 10
     (B) 14
     (C) 18
     (D) 20

   Solution
Think through what you know about equations. For there to be infinitely
many solutions, the equation can be formatted so that what is on the left
side and the right side are identical. For example, x + 5 = x + 5 would have
infinitely many solutions since any number can be plugged in for x to make
this equation true.
     So, let’s apply the same idea to this problem. For this equation to have
 infinitely many solutions, the two sides should be equal:




 Therefore, n equals 5 and m equals 4. The product comes from multiplying
 the two numbers together. Thus, the product of 5 and 4 is 5 × 4 = 20, choice
 (D).

 Practice Drill #1—Function Interpretation and Manipulation
 (If timing, take about 12 minutes to complete.)

In the equation E = m c2, what is the value of c in terms of the other values?

(A) Em
(B)
(C)
(D)

The formula to model the height, h, in meters of an object t seconds after
being dropped is h(t) = −4.9 t2 + h0 in which h0 is the height from which the
object is dropped. If the height of an object 3 seconds after being dropped is
0, what is the initial height of the object?

(A) 9.8 meters
(B) 17.2 meters
(C) 24.4 meters
(D) 44.1 meters

Body mass index is calculated by taking the mass of a person in pounds and
he height of a person in inches and plugging these values into this formula:
What is the mass of a person in terms of the other values?

(A)
(B)
(C)
(D)

The height of a rock thrown off a ledge relative to the ground beneath the
edge is graphed below.




At what time did the rock reach its maximum height?

(A) At the time of the throw
(B) 1 second after the throw
(C) 2 seconds after the throw
(D) 3.5 seconds after the throw

If                    , what is the value of the constant a?
(A) −6
(B) −3
(C)
(D) 8

The moon orbits Earth once approximately every 27 days. Titan, a moon of
 he planet Saturn, orbits Saturn once approximately every 16 days. For every
full planetary orbit the moon of Earth makes, M, how many orbits of Saturn
(or fractions thereof) will Titan make of Saturn, T?

(A)
(B)
(C)
(D)

 Fill-In Practice: Write your answer in the underlined blank under each
 question.

The number of geese at a lake tripled each year, when compared to the
number of geese on January 1 of each year between January 1, 2017, and
January 1, 2020. If there were 810 geese on January 1, 2020, how many
geese would there have been on January 1, 2017?
Answer: ________

What is the y-intercept of the graph of the following equation?



Answer: ________

If 2(3 x2 − 4x + 2) = a x2 + bx + c, what is the value of c?
Answer: ________
What is the slope of the line formed by the equation above?
Answer: ________

 Solutions
   1. (C) Isolate the c to arrive at your solution:




   2. (D) The value of h0 is the initial height of the object. So, plug in 3 for t


        and 0 for the final height, h(t):



   3. (A) Manipulate the equation until mass is isolated.




   4. (B) Find the point on the graph where the height is at its maximum:
    So, the rock reached its maximum height at 1 second after the throw.

5. (A)




     The constant a corresponds to −6.

6. (C) It takes the moon 27 days to make a complete orbit of Earth, and it
    takes Titan 16 days to make a complete orbit of Saturn. So, if the
    moon has made one full orbit, 27 days have gone by—in that time,
    Titan would have made nearly two orbits since it orbits more quickly.
    To be precise, it would make orbits. Therefore, the answer is
    choice (C)          .

    Another way to think about this: Titan makes of an orbit in one
    day. Since it takes the moon 27 days to make a complete orbit, Titan
    would make                 of an orbit in the time it takes the moon to
    make a single orbit.

7. (30) Since the number of geese triples each year, work your way
    backwards to the number of geese in 2017 by taking of each
    previous year’s total.

     In 2020, there were 810 geese.
     In 2019, there would be     of 810, which is 270.

     In 2018, there would be     of 270, which is 90.

     And in 2017, there would be      of 90, which is 30.

8. (6)




     Cancel the x − 3 →




     Since the equation is now in slope-intercept form, we can see that
     the y-intercept is 6. Alternatively, just plug in 0 for x and evaluate the
     y value.

9. (4) Distribute the 2 to put the left-hand side of the equation in a similar
    form to the right-hand side:




    So, the constant c is equal to the constant 4.
 10. (2) Manipulate this equation to get it in slope-intercept form:




      So, the slope, m, of the line is 2 since the equation is in the form y =
      mx + b.

 Practice Drill #2—Function Interpretation and Manipulation
 (If timing, take about 12 minutes to complete.)

In physics, force, F, is equal to the mass, m, multiplied by acceleration, a:


What is acceleration in terms of force and mass?

(A) a = F + m
(B)
(C)
(D)

In a sphere, the surface area, S, is calculated using the formula S = 4π r2,
where r is the radius of the sphere. What is the value of the radius in terms of
 he surface area?

(A)
(B)
(C)
(D)

If a is a positive constant, what is the value of a in the equation below?


(A) 4
(B) 5
(C) 6
(D) 30

The solute potential of a solution ΨS is calculated as follows:


In this equation, i is the ionization constant, C is the molar concentration, R is
 he pressure constant, and T is the temperature in degrees Kelvin. What is the
molar concentration in terms of the other values?

(A)

(B)
(C)

(D)


The height, h, of a ball thrown from the top of a ladder that is 10 feet above
 he ground, and t seconds after being thrown, is calculated using this
function:

After how many seconds would the ball reach its maximum height?

(A) 0.25 seconds
(B) 0.48 seconds
(C) 0.625 seconds
(D) 0.895 seconds

(2x − 3y)(4x + y) = 8 x2 + axy + bxy − 3 y2
In the equation with variables x and y above, what is the sum of the constants
a and b?

(A) −10
(B) −6
(C) 4
(D) 12




The graph above represents all the values for the function g(x) as graphed in
he xy-coordinate plane. What is the difference between the minimum and the
maximum value of the function?

(A) 5
(B) 7
(C) 8
(D) 10

k(a x2 + bx + 5) = 6 x2 − 21x + 15
In the expression above, in which k, a, and b are constants, what is the value
of k?

(A) 3
(B) 7
(C) 21
(D) 75

If f(x) = x2 − 4 and f (x + n) = x2 + 6x + 5, what is the value of the constant n?

(A) 1
(B) 2
(C) 3
(D) 4

If 2y = 3x − 4 and y + 1 = z − 5, what is x in terms of z?

(A)
(B)
(C)
(D)

 Solutions
   1. (D) Manipulate the equation so that a is isolated:



         Divide both sides by m →
2. (C) Solve the equation for the radius, r: In a sphere, the surface area,
    S, is calculated using the formula S = 4π r2, where r is the radius of
    the sphere. What is the value of the radius in terms of the surface
    area?




3. (A) FOIL the left-hand side of the equation so you can identify what
    values are equivalent:




     So, a could equal 4. Plugging this back in, you can see that having 4
     for a makes the equation work:




4. (D) Manipulate the equation to isolate for C, the molar concentration.



     Divide both sides by −iRT →
5. (C) The function is a parabola that is facing downwards, given the −16
    in front of the largest power term, t2. The maximum value for the
    height will therefore be at the parabola’s vertex. To find the value of t
    at the vertex, the easiest way to proceed is to use the formula         .
    The constant a is −16, and the constant b is 20. Instead of x, we can



    use the variable t:




6. (A) FOIL the left-hand side of the equation so you can identify the
    components that correspond to the values on the right side:



     Subtract the 8 x2 and −3 y2 from both sides →



     Divide both sides by xy →




     So, −10 equals the sum of a and b.

7. (C) The y value of the highest point on the function is 10, and the y
    value of the lowest point on the function is 2. So, the difference
    between the maximum and the minimum of the function will be 10 −
    2 = 8.

8. (A) Distribute the k to see potential equivalences:
       Based on this, we have three different equivalences:



       Since we do not know the values of a and b, the easiest way to solve

       this is to solve 5k = 15:


 9. (C) Plug x + n into f(x) = x2 − 4, then make this expression equivalent

      to x2 + 6x + 5 to solve for n:


       Given this equation, the easiest way to proceed is probably to set 2xn
       equal to 6x and solve for n:




10. (A) Solve this by making an equation that has only x and z in it,
     eliminating the y.




       Substitute this for y in the other equation:
Problem Solving and Data Analysis
This section contains comprehensive review and strategies for all of the
concepts below:

Problem Solving and Data Analysis—Measures of Center
     Mean
     Median
     Mode
     Outliers
     Range and Standard Deviation

Problem Solving and Data Analysis—Unit Conversion

Problem Solving and Data Analysis—Surveys
     Sampling Methods
     Drawing Conclusions

Problem Solving and Data Analysis—Percentages
     Percentage Essentials
     Percent Increase and Decrease
     Simple Interest
     Compound Interest

Problem Solving and Data Analysis—Graphs and Data Interpretation
     Probability
     Graph Interpretation
     Scatterplots
     Histograms
     Tables
     Box Plots
     Linear and Exponential Growth
     Interpreting Constants and Functions

Problem Solving and Data Analysis—Measures of Center
The SAT Math will assess your understanding of different ways of
calculating averages. Mean, median, and mode are the three major concepts
to know.

Mean



This is what you typically would do if asked to find the average of a set of
terms.

   Example 1
What is the mean of the numbers 2, 4, 7, 12, 14, and 18?

   Solution



   Example 2

There are four numbers in a set: 4, 10, 12, and x. If the mean of the four
terms is 10, what is the value of x?
   Solution
Set up an equation for the mean of the set, keeping x as an unknown value:




So, the value of x is 14.

Median
The middle term of a set of numbers when arranged from least to greatest.
(If there is an even number of terms and the two middle terms are different,
take the mean of the two middle terms to find the median of the set of
numbers.)

   Example 1
What is the median of this set of numbers? {1, 3, 6, 9, 12, 17, 22}

   Solution
The numbers are already arranged from least to greatest, so find the middle
term. In this case, since there are seven terms, the fourth term will be the
middle term. The answer is therefore 9.

   Example 2
What is the median of this set of numbers? {6, 4, 3, 10, 13, 14}

   Solution
First, arrange the numbers from least to greatest.



Notice that there are six numbers, and the two middle numbers are different.
So, to find the median of this set, we must take the mean of 6 and 10:


Mode
This is the most frequent number in a set. (Note that if a set of numbers has
each number appear just once, there will be zero modes. If a set of numbers
has two or more numbers tied for appearing the most times, it will have
multiple modes.)

   Example

What is the mode of this set of numbers? {1, 5, 3, 9, 2, 4, 8, 9}

   Solution

Every number in the set appears just once, except for 9, which appears
twice. Therefore, 9 is the mode of the set.

Outliers
A number in a set that is quite different from the other values in the set.

   Example
Which value in this set would be considered an outlier? {2, 3, 5, 6, 8, 240}

   Solution
While the first five numbers in the set are rather small, 240 is far larger than
the others and would be considered an outlier.
 Practice
What is the mean of this set of numbers? {1, 4, 9, 10}
What is the median of this set of numbers? {2, 4, 8, 9, 12}
What is the mode of this set of numbers? {4, 5, 7, 8, 4, 2, 9}
There are a total of four numbers in a set. The sum of the three smallest terms
 s 80. If the average of the set of four numbers is 30, what is the value of the
 argest number in the set?
What is the median of 4, 3, 8, 10, 20, and 12?
In this set of numbers, {1, 2, 4, 5, 5, 20, 56), is the mean, median, or mode
 he largest?
If an outlier is added to a set of numbers, would it most likely affect the
mode, median, or mean of the set?

 Solutions



There are five terms in the set, with 8 being the middle term since they are
already in order from least to greatest. Therefore, 8 is the median.
All the numbers appear just once, except for 4, which appears twice. Thus, 4
 s the mode of the set.
Calculate the value of the missing term, which we can call x, using the mean
formula. Since the smallest three terms add up to 80, we can add 80 and x to
get the sum of the items.




Put the numbers in order from least to greatest:
There are six terms and the third and fourth terms are different. So, to
calculate the median of the set, we must take the mean of 8 and 10:


Rather than calculating the individual values of the median, mean, and mode
for the set—{1, 2, 4, 5, 5, 20, 56)—you can take a shortcut. Since the set has
 wo numbers, 20 and 56, that are far greater than the others, they will cause
 he mean to be greater than the mode and median.
Alternatively, you can calculate the individual values of the mean, median,
and mode:
The mean is

The median is 5 since the fourth number out of the set of seven numbers is 5.
The mode is 5 since it appears most frequently.
So, however you find it, the mean will be the greatest.

An outlier would most likely affect the mean of a set of numbers, since it
would be included in the mathematical calculation of the average. It is
possible that an outlier would not change the median, so long as the middle
value remained the same. It is also possible that an outlier would not change
 he mode, so long as the outlier was not repeated.

 Range and Standard Deviation
 To analyze properties of data sets, understand the concepts of range and
 standard deviation.
 Range is the difference between the smallest and largest values in a set of
 data.

    Example

 What is the range of this set of numbers? {1, 3, 7, 9, 15}

    Solution
 Take the difference between the largest and smallest values in the set to find
 the range:



      Therefore, the range is 14.
      Standard deviation indicates how significant the spread of the data in a
 set is.




     Fortunately, instead of having you calculate the precise value of the
 standard deviation, the SAT tests your understanding of the concept of
 standard deviation.
     If the standard deviation in a set of numbers is small, there is little
 variation in the data.
     If the standard deviation in a set of numbers is large, there will be
 greater variation in the data.

    Example
 Which of the following sets will have a greater standard deviation?
 Set X: {5, 6, 7, 8, 9}
 Set Y: {1, 20, 40, 80, 95}

    Solution
 Set Y will have a greater standard deviation because the numbers deviate
 more greatly from its mean. The values in Set X are much more closely
 clustered around one another.

 Practice

What is the range of this set of numbers? {-5, 3, 8, 20, 28}
Which of the following numbers, if added to the set {2, 5, 8, 11, 15} would
most likely decrease its standard deviation?

(A) 2
(B) 5
(C) 8
(D) 15

What positive number could be added to the set {2, 4, 8, 9, 18} to double its
range?
Would a sample of ages among students in an elementary school or a sample
of ages among residents of a city more likely have a greater standard
deviation?

 Solutions

Find the difference between the least and greatest values in the set to
calculate the range:



Since the standard deviation is calculated by the


 f you add a data point that is equal to the mean, that would certainly reduce
 he standard deviation of the set. Since the number 8 is equal to the mean,
adding it would ensure that the average of the squared distances of the data
points from their mean would decrease. So, the answer is (C), 8.

First, let’s calculate the original range of the set by subtracting the least value
from the greatest value:


Now, let’s double this range:
Since the question asks us to find a positive number that could be added to
he set that would cause it to have this doubled range of 32, we can add the
east value to this range to find the needed value to be added:
So, if 34 were added to the set, the range of the set would double.

Standard deviation provides a measure of the spread of data points—the
greater the spread, the greater the standard deviation. In an elementary
school, the ages of students would most likely be clustered around lower
ages, like 5–12. In a town, the residents would range in age from very young
 o very old. So, it is more likely that the standard deviation of ages in the
 own would be greater.

 Practice Drill—Measures of Center
 (If timing, take about 12 minutes to complete.)

{2, 7, 9, x, 12, 15}
Consider the data set above. What must the value of x be so that the median
of the data set is 10?

(A) 9
(B) 10
(C) 11
(D) 12

What is the mean of the fractions , , and ?

(A)
(B)
(C)
(D)
For a fundraiser, 8 students sold fewer than 5 coupon books. Ten students
sold at least 5 and no more than 10 coupon books. Fifteen students sold 11 or
more coupon books. Assuming that the previously mentioned students
represent the entire set of students, which of the following could have been
 he median number of coupon books for this group based on this
 nformation?

(A) 4
(B) 8
(C) 10.5
(D) 12

            Number of Apps on a          How Many Students with
           Phone (Range of Values)       Number of Apps in Range
                      0–5                              2
                     6–10                              5
                     11–15                             7
                     16–20                             4
                  More than 20                         2


 4. Twenty students were asked how many apps they had on their phones.
    The results are provided in the table above. If two students are added to
    this set, one of whom has just 3 apps and the other of whom has 26
    apps, how would the median number of apps per student be affected?

     (A) Increases
     (B) Decreases
     (C) Remains the same
     (D) Cannot determine from the given information

 5. Five students purchased a computer that costs $1,000. The students split
    the cost equally among themselves. In order for the share per person to
    decrease by $75, how many additional students would they need to
    share in the purchase, given that they would all share the cost equally?

    (A) 3
    (B) 4
    (C) 6
    (D) 8

6. {1, 4, 5, 5.5, 6, 6.5, 9.5}
    In the above set of numbers, the two values that are the greatest outliers
    from the others are removed. Once these two values are removed, what
    is the range of the remaining values?

    (A) 2.5
    (B) 3
    (C) 7
    (D) 8.5

7. The maximum weight a certain elevator can hold is 3,000 pounds. For a
   group of 15 people to go on the elevator, what is the maximum the
   mean of their weights could be?

    (A) 170 pounds
    (B) 190 pounds
    (C) 200 pounds
    (D) 240 pounds

8. A student had scores of 80, 90, 85, 100, 75, and 85 on his tests in a
   history class. If the teacher threw out his worst test grade, which of
   these values describing the set of his scores would change?

    (A) Mean
    (B) Median
     (C) Mode
     (D) None of the above

 9. Jake has a smartwatch that helps him keep track of the number of steps
    he takes each day. On Monday, he walked 8,000 steps; Tuesday, 13,000;
    Wednesday, 7,000; and Thursday, 8,500. Which inequality expresses
    the number of steps, n, that Jake could walk on Friday so that the
    average for the 5 days is at least 10,000 steps per day?

     (A)
     (B)
     (C)
     (D)

10. The heights in inches of 10 people in a room is given below:


     If someone new comes in to the room and has a height of 74 inches,
     which of these is an accurate statement about the range and standard
     deviation of the set?

     (A) Only the standard deviation would change.
     (B) Only the range would change.
     (C) Both the standard deviation and range would change.
     (D) Neither the standard deviation nor range would change.

 Solutions
(C) There are 6 numbers in this set, so the median will be the average of the
 wo middle terms. If the two middle terms were 7 and 9, the median would be
8; if the two middle terms were 9 and 12, the median would be 10.5. So, x
must be between 9 and 12 and must average out to 10. You can therefore

solve for x by solving the following equation:


Thus, 11 would be the value of x that would cause the set of numbers to have
a median of 10.

(C) First, modify all the fractions so they have the same denominator, 12:



Then, add the fractions together and divide by 3 to solve for the mean.




(B) Let us find the total number of students in the set: 8 + 10 + 15 = 33. The
middle value will be the 17th value, since there would be 16 values less than
 t and 16 values greater than it.
Since there are 8 who sold fewer than 5, and 10 students who sold between
5–10 books, the 17th term if the terms were placed in order from least to
greatest would be within the range of 5–10 books. The answer is therefore 8
because it is the only number within this range.

(C) Because there are 20 students, the initial median will be the average of
 he 10th and 11th terms. The 10th and 11th terms will both fall between the
range of 11–15 apps based on the table. If a student with 3 apps and a student
with 26 apps were added to this set, they would balance each other out and
 here would be no impact on the median of the set. Therefore, the median of
 he set would remain the same.

(A) First, let’s find the original cost per student by calculating the mean when
 here are 5 students and a total price of $1,000:
So, the initial share per student is $200. If the amount of the share per student
 s to decrease by $75, the new share per student would be 200 − 75 = 125
dollars. Set up a new calculation of the mean to solve for the number of
students, x, who would need to be added to the initial 5 students to get a new


average of $125:



Therefore, if 3 students were added to the total, there would be a total of 8
students who could share the cost at an equal amount of $125 a person.

(A) The two greatest outliers in the set are the values that are farthest from
 he mean: 1 and 9.5. If we remove these values, the new set is {4, 5, 5.5, 6,
6.5}. To calculate the range of this new set, subtract the smallest value from
 he largest value:

(C) Since the maximum weight is 3,000 pounds, divide 3,000 by 15 to find
 he mean under these conditions:



(A) Let’s see how the mean, median, and mode will be affected by this
change of removing the score of 75, the worst test grade, from the set. The
original set, when the numbers are put in order from least to greatest, is {75,
80, 85, 85, 90, 100}. The new set would be {80, 85, 85, 90, 100}.
Therefore, only the mean of the set will change. If you notice that the mode
and median will not be affected, you can see that just the mean will be
affected since removing one value that is less than the original mean will
 nevitably change the mean of the set.

(B) This is a question where looking ahead to the answers can help, since the
answers show that you just need to set up the calculation, rather than doing it
all the way to completion. Be careful to avoid careless mistakes, especially
with the direction of the inequality sign. Jake wants to average at least
10,000 steps per day, so the average number of steps must be greater than or
equal to 10,000: average ≥ 10,000. The average is calculated by adding the
known values together and treating n as the one day that is not known. There
are 5 total days including n. Therefore, the calculation will be:


(A) The range of the set is the difference between the least and greatest terms
 n the set: 76 − 44 = 32. The range will not change if 74 were added to the
set, since the values of the least and greatest numbers in the set would remain
at 44 and 76.
The standard deviation of the set would change since the variation of the
numbers from the mean will be different with the relatively large value of 74
added to the group. Therefore, the answer is (A).

 Problem Solving and Data Analysis—Unit Conversion
                                 SAT Math Strategy
  Use proportions to solve simple unit conversions, and use unit cancellation to solve more
  complex unit conversions.

  If an SAT Math problem involves a straightforward calculation between just two units, you
  can probably solve it using a proportion.



   Example 1
There are 5,280 feet in 1 mile. If Susan runs 3.5 miles, how many feet did
she run?

   Solution
Set up a proportion to solve for the x number of feet that Susan ran in the
race. It is easier if you place the variable for which you are solving in the
numerator so the algebra is less complex.



Multiply both sides by 3.5 miles to solve for x →



Cancel out the miles units and the 3.5 on the right side →




   Example 2

Ahmad has 300 U.S. dollars that he wants to convert to euros. His bank
offers an exchange rate of 0.83 euros for 1 U.S. dollar. Assuming there are
no fees or taxes, if Ahmad converts all 300 of his dollars to euros, how
many euros will he have?

   Solution

Set up a proportion to solve for euros:



Multiply both sides by 300 dollars to solve for x →



Cancel out the dollars units and the 300 on the right side →




So, Ahmad would have 249 euros after the currency conversion.

   Example 3
Emily took a bike ride that was 8 kilometers long. Given that there are
approximately 0.6214 miles in a kilometer and 5,280 feet in a mile,
approximately how many feet was Emily’s bike ride?

   Solution

Ultimately, your unit conversion will end with feet. Use dimensional
analysis or the unit-factor method (different ways of labelling the same
idea) to cancel out units and end with the desired unit. The ride is 8
kilometers, and there are 0.6214 miles in a kilometer and 5,280 feet in a
mile. So, set up the unit conversion like this:
Cancel out units that are in both the numerator and denominator:




   Example 4
Timothy has 1 gallon of milk. There are approximately 3.785 liters in 1
gallon. How many milliliters of milk does Timothy have?

   Solution

While the SAT will give you many conversion ratios, there are some that it
will be helpful to memorize:


       12 inches in 1 foot
       60 seconds in 1 minute
       60 minutes in 1 hour
       100 centimeters in 1 meter (Prefix centi means “one-hundredth.”)
       1,000 millimeters in 1 meter (Prefix milli means “one-thousandth.”)
       1,000 milliliters in 1 liter (Prefix milli means “one-thousandth.”)
       1,000 meters in 1 kilometer (Prefix kilo means “thousand.”)

In this problem, we will ultimately end up with milliliters. Use dimensional
analysis or the unit-factor method to cancel out units and end with the


desired unit of milliliters:




Practice Drill—Problem Solving and Data Analysis: Unit
Conversion
 (If timing, take about 12 minutes to complete.)

Approximately how many kilometers are in a marathon, given that a
marathon is 26.22 miles and that there are 1.609 kilometers in a mile?

(A) 16.3 km
(B) 27.8 km
(C) 42.2 km
(D) 74.5 km

The Empire State Building in New York City has a height of 1,250 feet,
while if its pinnacle is included, it has a height of 1,454 feet. What is the
height of just the pinnacle to the nearest whole meter given that there are 3.28
feet in 1 meter?

(A) 62 meters
(B) 85 meters
(C) 204 meters
(D) 669 meters

If 1 ounce of platinum sells for $700 and 1 ounce of gold sells for $1,700,
how much more expensive would a pound of gold be than a pound of
platinum, given that there are 16 ounces in a pound?

(A) $7,000
(B) $16,000
(C) $27,200
(D) $38,400

A barrel has a volume of 42 gallons. If you have 105 gallons of a liquid, what
would be the equivalent number of barrels of the liquid?

(A) 0.4 barrels
(B) 1.5 barrels
(C) 2.5 barrels
(D) 6.8 barrels

The depth in feet of water, D, in a lake x days after it was dammed is given
by this equation:

Based on this equation, how many inches does the depth of the water in the
ake increase each day?

(A) 0.5
(B) 3.5
(C) 6
(D) 30

In 1875, Matthew Webb was the first person to successfully swim across the
English Channel. He took about 22 hours to make the roughly 22-mile swim.
Given that there are about 1.61 kilometers in a mile, what was his
approximate average swimming speed for this trip in kilometers per hour?

(A) 0.62 km/hour
(B) 1.61 km/hour
(C) 35 km/hour
(D) 44 km/hour

The speed of sound as it travels through rubber is approximately 60 meters
per second. How fast does sound travel through rubber in kilometers per
hour?

(A) Approximately 216 km/hour
(B) Approximately 642 km/hour
(C) Approximately 36,000 km/hour
(D) Approximately 216,000 km/hour
 Fill-In Practice: Write your answer in the underlined blank under each
 question.

 8. Mark rides his bicycle 30 feet in 2 seconds. At that rate, how many feet
    would he travel in 1 minute on his bicycle?
     Answer: ________

 9. The key on a map indicates that 1 inch on the map corresponds to ½ of
    a mile in actual distance. If the distance on the map between two points
    is 6 inches, how many miles apart would they be in real life?
     Answer: ________

10. The number of cloves in a head of garlic is between 10 and 12. If a
    recipe called for 3.5 heads of garlic, what would a possible value for the
    number of cloves that would meet this requirement?
     Answer: ________

 Solutions
(C) Use a proportion to solve for the number of kilometers in a marathon:



Cross Multiply:



Cancel out the miles:




(A) First, determine the height of the pinnacle by itself by subtracting the
height of just the building from the height of the building and pinnacle
combined:
Then, set up a proportion to solve for the height of the pinnacle in meters:




(B) First, recognize that we need to convert the difference between the price
of gold and platinum:


Then, multiply $1,000 by 16 ounces to find the total difference in price per
pound:


(C) Use a proportion to solve this problem:




(C) The equation is written in slope-intercept form, so to see how much the
depth is increasing in feet each day, look at the slope—0.5. Then, convert .5
feet to inches. Since there are 12 inches in a foot, multiply 0.5 feet by 12
 nches to get the converted number of inches:

So, each day the depth of water increases by 6 inches.
(B) We want to have the units result in kilometers per hour, so use unit


cancellation to determine this speed:




Alternatively, you could have noticed that the speed is 1 mile per hour, so just
multiply 1 mile per hour by 1.61.

(A) Use unit-cancellation to solve for the speed in kilometers per hour:




(900) Use unit-cancellation to solve for the distance he will travel in 1
minute:




(3) Use a proportion to solve for the miles:
(Any number greater than or equal to 35 and less than or equal to 42.)
Find the lower number by multiplying 10 by 3.5, and the greater number by
multiplying 12 by 3.5:

So, the range of garlic cloves would be between 35 and 42, inclusive
(meaning including 35 and 42 also).

 Problem Solving and Data Analysis—Percentages

 Percentage Essentials
 Percent calculations are heavily emphasized on the SAT Math. To be
 successful on percent problems, there are several key formulas it is helpful
 to memorize.




 In most situations you will come across, the “part” will be the smaller
 number and the “whole” will be the larger number.

    Example 1
 If there are 200 students in a graduating class, and 40 of them graduated
 with honors, what percent of students in the class graduated with honors?

    Solution

 The “part” is 40, and the “whole” is 200. Plug these values into the above
 formula to calculate the percent:




    Example 2
If 60% is considered a passing grade on a particular test, and the test has 30
questions, how many questions would a test taker have to answer correctly
to pass the test?

   Solution
Use 60% as the “percent,” and use 30 as the “whole,” since 30 represents
the total number of questions. Then, use the percent formula to solve for the
“part”—the number of questions that must be answered correctly to pass:




So, one would need to answer at least 18 questions correctly to pass the test.

   Example 3

If 30% of the cars in a parking lot have bumper stickers, what fraction of
the cars in the parking lot would have bumper stickers?

   Solution

Manipulate the percent formula so we can convert this situation to a
fraction:




Use 30 as the percent, then reduce the fraction:



So,    of the cars in the parking lot have bumper stickers.
   Example 4

Michal took a test that had 20 points, and she earned 2 points of extra credit
in addition to a perfect score on the test. What was her percentage score?

   Solution
In this situation, the “part” will be 22 to include the perfect score and the
extra credit. The “whole” will be 20, given that total number of points on
the test. So, calculate her percentage scores as follows:



For problems like these, it can be helpful to know the conversions of
fractions to percentages off the top of your head:




The part/whole formula will always work, so you can stick to that approach
if you are more comfortable. There are, however, a number of ways to work
with percentages more efficiently depending on the type of problem.



   When asked to find the percent of a number, take the percent and
   move the decimal point to the left two spots and then multiply.



   Example 1
What is 75% of 500?

   Solution
Rather than using the previous percent formula to solve, start by taking the
75% and moving the decimal point to the left by two spots:



Now multiply by 500:



So, 375 represents 75% of 500.

   Example 2

What is 4% of 20?

   Solution

Move the decimal point of 4% to the left by two spots:



Now multiply by 20:



So, 0.8 is 4% of 20.

   Example 3
What is 150% of 70?

   Solution
 Move the decimal point of 150 to the left by two spots:



 Then, multiply by 70:



 Practice
What is 40% of 240?
Two out of every five students at a school pack their lunches each day. What
percent of students at the school pack their lunches each day?
What is 5% of 125?
With extra credit, Chris had a 105% as his grade for the semester in a class. If
he scored 100% on every assignment throughout the semester, and there were
a total of 400 points from all the regular assignments (not including extra
credit), how many points in extra credit did he get that semester?
If 60 employees in a business work part-time, and these employees represent
30% of all the employees at the business, how many total employees does the
business have?

 Solutions

0.4 × 240 = 96



0.05 × 125 = 6.25

Just take 5% of the total points from the regular assignments to find the
points in extra credit he earned:



Plug in values to the general percentage formula to solve for the total number
of employees:
Cross multiply →




So, the business has a total of 200 employees.

 Percent Increase and Decrease
 To find the percent by which something has increased or decreased, use this
 formula, being careful on what you plug in for the “original” and “new”
 values:

 If the value of the percent change is positive, the change is increasing. If the
 value is negative, the change is decreasing.

    Example 1

 Melanie’s height is 40 inches. A year later, her height is 44 inches. By what
 percent did her height increase?

    Solution

 The original value is 40, and the new value is 44, so the calculation is




 So, Melanie’s height has increased by 10%.

    Example 2
William has $800 in his checking account. If he spends $200 out of his
checking account, by what percent did his checking account decrease?

   Solution

The new value is $600 ($800 − $200), and the original value is $800, so the
calculation is




Since this value is negative, there has been a 25% decrease in his checking
account.
   What are easy ways to calculate the new amount if we know the percent
by which something has increased or decreased?




   Example 1

If the cost of a gallon of milk, originally at $2 a gallon, increased by 20%,
what would be the new cost of a gallon of milk?

   Solution

Use the increased total formula, plugging in 2 for the original amount, and
using 0.20 as the r since we must express 20% as a decimal:


So, the new price of a gallon of milk would be $2.40.
    Example 2
 If a toy is originally $30 and is on sale for 40% off, what would its new
 price be?

    Solution
 Use the decreased total formula, plugging in 30 for the original amount and
 0.40 for r since 40% must be expressed as a decimal:




 Therefore, the discounted price of the toy is $18.

 Practice
What number is 60% more than 40?
The amount of monthly rainfall in a town in January was 10 inches, and in
February it was 7 inches. By what percent did the monthly rainfall decrease?
A car originally sells for $20,000, but is on sale for 10% off. How much
money would a buyer save by purchasing the car on sale? (Do not include
sales tax in your calculations.)
During the school year, Ashra would read 3 hours a week for fun. Over the
summer, she would read 9 hours a week for fun. By what percent did her
weekly leisure reading in the summer increase compared to what she did
during the school year?
A book typically sells for $30, but there is a 20% discount. After including a
7% sales tax, what is the sale price of the book?

 Solutions

Use this formula, Increased Total = (Original Amount) × (1 + r), plugging in
40 as the original amount and 0.4 as r, since the percent must be expressed as
a decimal:
Use this formula,                                       , plugging in 10 as the
original amount and 7 as the new amount to solve for the percent it has

changed:


Since this is negative, the monthly rainfall has decreased by 30%.

Rather than using the percent change formula, recognize that you simply
need to calculate 10% of $20,000 to find the amount saved:


So, the amount of money saved is $2,000.

Calculate the percent increase using this formula,
                                    , plugging in 3 for the original amount

and 9 for the new amount:


Since this is positive, there is a 200% increase in her weekly leisurely
reading.

First, use this formula to find the discounted price:


Use 30 as the original amount and r as 0.2 to represent the 20% discount:



Now, use Increased Total = (Original Amount) × (1 + r) to find the price after
adding the 7% sales tax, using 24 as the original amount and 0.07 as the r
(since 7% would be expressed as a decimal):



So, the sale price after tax is added is $25.68.

 Simple Interest
 The SAT will frequently test your skill in calculating how interest applied
 over time will affect the amount. First, simple interest enables you to
 calculate the interest over a set period of time.


                                Simple Interest

                                   I=P×r×t

    I = Amount of Interest
    P = Principal (Original Amount)
    r = Interest rate expressed as a decimal
    t = Time period the interest is applied (usually years)



    Example 1

 Andrew has $500 in his savings account, and it receives 1% interest over a
 year. How much interest would he have accumulated after the end of the
 year?

    Solution
 Use the formula I = P × r × t to solve for the amount of interest. The
 principal is $500, the interest rate expressed as a decimal is 0.01, and the
 time period is one year.
So, Andrew would earn $5 in interest in one year.

   Example 2
Bridget’s home price increases by 4% in simple interest (not compounded)
over a three-year period. If her home at the beginning of the three-year
period costs $100,000, what is the price at the end of the period?

   Solution

Use I = P × r × t to find the amount of interest over the three-year period.
The principal is $100,000, the rate is 0.04, and the time period is 3:


Then, add 12,000 to the original price to find out the price of the house at
the end of the period:



So, the price of her house after three years would be $112,000.

Compound Interest
More frequently, the SAT Math will ask about compound interest:



                           Compound Interest



   A = Future Value
   P = Initial Value (Principal)
   r = Interest Rate Expressed as a Decimal (r is positive if increasing,
   negative if decreasing)
   t = Time
   n = Number of Times Interest is Compounded over Time Period t
   Example 1
A savings bond has an initial value of $500. The interest on the bond is 4%,
compounded annually. What is the value of the savings bond after 2 years?

   Solution
Use the compound interest formula to solve. The initial value is $500, the
interest rate expressed as a decimal is 0.04, the time is 2 years, and the
number of times it is compounded each year is 1.




So, the savings bond would have a value of $540.80 after a 2-year time
period.

   Example 2

The depth in a lake is 40 meters, and is decreasing by 1.2% each month,
compounded. After 1 year, what will the depth of the lake be to the nearest
hundredth of a meter?

   Solution
Use the compound interest formula, with 40 as P, −0.012 as r (since the
depth is decreasing), n as 12 (since there are 12 months in a year), and t as 1
since there is 1 year.
So, the depth of the lake after 1 year to the nearest hundredth of a meter is
39.52 meters.


                                   SAT Math Strategy
   In order to visualize percentage changes with variables, use 100 as an initial value.



   Example

The price, P, after n years for a television that initially costs x dollars is
given in the function below.



If the price of a television decreases by 10% each year, what is the value of
the constant k?

      (A) 0.1
      (B) 0.9
      (C) 10
      (D) 90

   Solution

Most of the SAT Math problems you encounter will have concrete numbers
in them. On the occasion that you have one with pure variables, it can often
be difficult to visualize the potential changes. To make things easier, use
100 as an initial value—that way you can efficiently calculate the percent
change from the initial value.
      With this problem, let’s then use 100 as the initial value for x. If the
 initial value decreases by 10%, it would be 90 the following year. So, we



 can plug in 90 for P, 100 for x, and 1 for n, then solve for k:



 So, the answer is (B), 0.9 as the k value.

 Practice Drill #1—Problem Solving and Data Analysis:
 Percentages
 (If timing, take about 12 minutes to complete.)

What is 150% of 3,000?

(A) 1,500
(B) 2,000
(C) 4,500
(D) 5,500

At a certain university, 25% of graduating seniors earned an honors diploma.
What is the number of students graduating with an honors diploma if there
were a total of 480 graduating seniors at the university?

(A) 100
(B) 120
(C) 200
(D) 600

If a computer that regularly costs $800 is on sale for 20% off, what would its
sale price be (do not include sales tax in your calculation)?

(A) $160
(B) $200
(C) $600
(D) $640

           Average Commute Time
            from Home to Work              Percentage of Respondents
                Less than 10 minutes                    25%
                   10–30 minutes                        45%
                  Over 30 minutes                       30%


If the number of respondents with an average commute of greater than 30
minutes is 240, how many people all together responded to this survey?

(A) 480
(B) 620
(C) 800
(D) 960

Sam purchases a total of 25 gift cards for his friends, with the gift cards being
for retail stores or for restaurants. If he purchases 50% more retail store gift
cards than restaurant gift cards, how many retail store gift cards did he
purchase?

(A) 12.5
(B) 15
(C) 20
(D) 37.5

In a park, 15% of the parkgoers were children, 45% were male adults, and the
remaining 8 were adult females. How many parkgoers were there all
 ogether?

(A) 20
(B) 24
(C) 30
(D) 36

Chelsea has a temperature of 98.6°F. The next day, she has a fever, with a
 emperature of 103.2°F. By what percentage, calculated to the nearest tenth of
a percent, did her temperature increase from the first day to the second day?

(A) 4.5%
(B) 4.7%
(C) 5.1%
(D) 5.4%

The U.S. stock market has returned a historical average of approximately
10% per year. If this rate of return were to continue into the future, what
function would model the value, V, of an initial investment of VO in the stock
market t years from now?

(A) V(t) = VO (10)t
(B) V(t) = VO (110)t
(C) V(t) = VO (1.1)t
(D) V(t) = VO (0.1)t

A new car is on sale for 15% off the sticker price. Maxwell is trading in his
old car for a total of $5,000—all of this counts as a credit toward the price
paid for a new car purchase. Assuming there is no sales tax, if the car has a
sticker price of x dollars, what amount will Maxwell have to pay, P, for a new
car, accounting for the sale discount and the trade-in credit?

(A) P = 0.85x − 5, 000
(B) P = 0.85 + 5, 000
(C) P = 0.15x − 5, 000
(D) P = 0.15x + 5, 000

The gravitational force, F, is related to the gravitational constant, G, mass of
one object, m1, and mass of another object, m2, and the distance between the
centers of the objects, r, using the following equation:

By what percent would the gravitational force between two objects change if
he distance between them were doubled and the other quantities remained
he same?

(A) It would decrease by 50%.
(B) It would decrease by 75%.
(C) It would increase by 100%.
(D) It would increase by 200%.

 Solutions

(C) Take 150 and move the decimal point over two spots to the left. Then
multiply this by 3,000:


(B) Calculate 25% of 480 by moving the decimal point two spots to the left
 n 25, then multiplying it by 480:


(D) Use the formula Decreased Total = (Original Amount) × (1 − r), with 800
as the original amount and r as 0.2:




(C) Use the formula                  Percent to calculate the total number of
survey participants. Let’s use x as the unknown number of total survey
participants, 30 as the percent, and 240 as the “part”:


Cross multiply →




(B) Set up an equation modeling the situation. The total number of gift cards
 s 25, and he purchased 50% more retail cards than restaurant cards. Use x as
 he number of restaurant cards and use 1.5x as the number of retail cards,
since it is 50% more:


Then, using the formula Number of Retail Gift Cards = (Original Amount) ×
(1 + r), calculate the number of retail gift cards purchased; 10 will be the
original amount, and r will be 0.5:



Therefore, he will purchase 15 retail store gift cards. You could also try
plugging in the answers to see which would fit the criteria.

(A) The percent of female parkgoers will be what remains after subtracting
 he children and males:


So, 40% of the parkgoers are female, and this number will be 8. Now, we can
solve for the total number of parkgoers by using the equation
Percent; let’s use x as the “whole,” 40 as the “percent,” and 8 as the “part.”
Cross Multiply →




So, the total number of parkgoers is 20.

(B) Use the formula                          Percent Change to calculate the
percent change. The original value is 98.6 and the new value is 103.2:




(C) Use the formula                  to model the future value of the
 nvestment. V(t) will be A, P will be VO, r will be 0.1, n will be 1, and t will
stay as a variable.




You could also solve this by looking at what makes the answer choices
different and noticing that the only one that would show a 10% increase is
choice (C).

(A) Take a 15% discount off the price of the new car to find what he will
have to pay before the trade-in value is included:



Then, subtract $5,000 from the price paid to include the trade-in value:
(B) In doing the comparison, keep everything constant that remains constant,
and change only what is different. The gravitational force, F, and the
distance, r, are the only things that will change. Consider the original force:



Now, double the distance, r, and see how the original force would change:




So, the new force is of the original value, which means it has decreased by
 its original value. Convert to a percentage by using a proportion:




Therefore, the gravitational force between the two objects would decrease by
75% if the distance between them were doubled.

 Practice Drill #2—Problem Solving and Data Analysis:
 Percentages
 (If timing, take about 12 minutes to complete.)
 Fill-In Practice: Write your answer in the underlined blank under each
 question.

What number is 130% of 50?
Answer: ________

In the United States in 2019, approximately 62% of utility electricity came
from fossil fuels, 20% from nuclear, and 18% from renewable sources. What
fraction of U.S. utility electricity in 2019 came from nuclear?
Answer: ________

A wind turbine has a maximum electrical generating capacity of 200
kilowatts per hour, and it operates on average at 25% of this maximum
capacity. If the turbine operates at its average capacity for an entire day, how
many kilowatts of electricity would it produce?
Answer: ________

                        Percent of
                         Students
                           Who
          Mascot          Prefer
         Preference       Mascot
            Tiger           10%
             Lion           15%
             Bear           30%
            Eagle           25%
             Dog            20%


A college had all of its students vote on their preference for a new school
mascot. If the number of students who preferred Bear exceeded the number
who preferred Dog by 240 students, how many students selected Eagle?
Answer: ________

A toy store sells only dolls and games; 70% of the toys it sells are dolls and
30% are games. The store sells a total of 400 toys. How many more dolls
 han games does the store sell?
Answer: ________

 Multiple-Choice Practice

A house was initially listed for sale at $200,000. After three months, the
sellers still had not sold it and decided to drop the price by 15%. What would
he new price be?

(A) $170,000
(B) $185,000
(C) $215,000
(D) $230,000

A school district is doing a ten-year projection of its student enrollment. If at
 he start of the ten years there are 2,000 students in the district, and the
student enrollment increases by 5% each year, what would be the enrollment
t years from now?

(A) 2, 000 (1.5)t
(B) 2, 000 (1.05)t
(C) 2, 000 (.05)t
(D) 2, 000 (5)t

In the year 2010, New York City had a population density of 27,016 people
per square mile, and San Francisco had a population density of 17,246 people
per square mile. The population density in San Francisco was what percent
 ower than the population density in New York in 2010, calculated to the
nearest tenth of a percent?

(A) 36.2%
(B) 41.6%
(C) 53.4%
(D) 63.8%

The elimination half-life of a medicine is the amount of time it takes for the
concentration of the medicine in the body to be reduced by half. If a
particular medicine starts at a dose of 100 mg that is fully absorbed in the
body and has an elimination half-life of 8 hours, how much of the medicine
remains in the body after 1 day?
(A) 6.25 mg
(B) 12.5 mg
(C) 25 mg
(D) 36 mg

One serving of a cereal is of a cup and has 20% of the daily recommended
amount of only fiber, which is 6 grams. If another cereal has a serving size of
1 cup, how many grams of fiber should it have to provide 30% of the daily
value of fiber?

(A) 4 grams
(B) 6 grams
(C) 9 grams
(D) 12 grams

 Solutions

(65) Move the decimal point in 130 to the left two spots, then multiply by 50:


          Convert the 20% from nuclear to a percentage by reducing the
fraction to its simplest form:

This could also be expressed as a decimal, 0.2.

(1,200) Multiply the number of kilowatts per hour, 200, by 0.25 to get the
25% operational level. Then, multiply this by 24 since there are 24 hours in a
day:

So, it would produce 1,200 kilowatts of electricity in a day.

(600) The Bear students are 30% of the total, and the Dog students are 20%
of the total. The difference between them is 10%, so 10% of the total is 240.
Multiply 240 by 10 to get the total number of students (since 10% multiplied
by 10 is 100%):

Then, take 25% of the total:


(160) Calculate the number of dolls sold (70% of 400):


Then, calculate the number of games sold (30% of 400):


Then, subtract 120 from 280 to find how many more dolls are sold than
games:


Alternatively, if you notice the difference between them must equal 40% of
 he total toys sold, you could just take 40% of 400 and get the same result of
160.

(A) Calculate the discounted price by using this formula,
Decreased Total = (Original Amount) × (1 − r), with 200,000 as the original
amount and r as 0.15:




(B) Use the formula                 to determine what the enrollment would
be. A represents the enrollment, P is the original number of 2,000 students, r
 s 0.05 (5% expressed as a decimal), n is 1 since the compounding is annual,


and t will remain a variable:
(A) Use the formula                         Percent Change to calculate the
percent difference between the population density of New York City and San
Francisco. The “original” value will be 27,016 and the “new” will be 17,246:




Since this is negative, the population density in San Francisco is about
36.2% lower than it is in New York City.

(B) During a one-day period of 24 hours, the medicine will have gone
 hrough three half-life cycles, since each half-life cycle is 8 hours and 8 goes
 nto 24 three times. So, to find out how much of the medicine is left after
 hree half-life cycles, take 50% of the original amount of 100 three times:


(C) Sort out the essential information here, as there is irrelevant information
given. The serving sizes of the cereal are not important—what is important is
providing the correct amount of fiber. The first cereal provides 20% of the
daily value of fiber in its serving; the second cereal provides 30% of the daily
value of fiber in its serving. Set up a proportion to solve for x, the number of

grams of fiber in the second cereal:



 Problem Solving and Data Analysis—Surveys
 Surveys are a part of everyday life, and the SAT will assess your skill in
 interpreting surveys. One of the biggest things emphasized will be
 determining whether a sampling method is appropriate.

 Sampling Methods
                                  SAT Math Strategy
  In general, to get the best results in a survey, have the sample be as large and as random as
  possible. The larger and more random the survey, the less the potential bias will be in the
  results.



Let’s first look at some ways a survey could be POORLY conducted.
      Sample is chosen non-randomly:
      Example: Researcher interviews only parents and caregivers at a
      playground on their thoughts about increased funding for
      extracurricular activities at schools to determine what all the citizens
      in the community think about increased extracurricular funding. Why
      is this problematic? If the researcher is interested in sampling the
      community as a whole, by limiting the respondents to parents and
      caregivers who have congregated at a playground, the researcher will
      oversample those who are already interested in children’s activities
      and/or have children.
      Example: A city worker samples city residents who have
      memberships to the city’s community center about whether they
      would support a tax levy for an additional city community center.
      Why is this problematic? If the respondents are all members of the
      city’s community center, they are using this service already. So, it is
      more likely they will support increased funding for a city service
      they enjoy. The worker should instead include respondents who are
      not already members of the community center.
      Participants can volunteer:
      Example: A politician has a survey on her website asking whether
      she or her opponent won a political debate. Why is this problematic?
      Supporters are more likely to be on her website and believe their
      preferred candidate—i.e., the politician conducting the survey—won
      the debate. This will result in a sample of respondents skewed toward
      those who already supported the candidate.
      Example: A theme park worker asks people who are leaving the
      theme park to complete a 10-minute customer survey about their
      experience. Why is this problematic? This will result in a sample
      skewed toward those who have the time to complete the survey and
      feel passionately enough about their experience (for good or for bad)
      to want to answer questions.
      Sample size is too small:
      Example: A student, who lives in a city of 100,000 people, surveys
      four city residents about their favorite restaurant in the city and
      draws conclusions about the city’s favorite restaurant. Why is this
      problematic? Four people is too small of a sample when the
      population of the city is 100,000.

Now, let’s consider some ways a survey could be conducted WELL.
      Responses are randomly collected.
      Example: To survey a group of 1,000 people, a random number
      generator selects which of the 1,000 people will be respondents.
      Example: To select 100 respondents for a political survey in a state, a
      researcher randomly selects phone numbers from a database of all
      mobile phones and landlines in the state.
      The sample size is sufficiently large.
      Example: To predict the winner of an upcoming senatorial election, a
      random sample of 1,000 likely voters is conducted.
      All groups in a survey are fairly represented.
      Example: To test the effectiveness of a medicine in the population as
      a whole, a university ensures that there are sufficient patients in the
      study from different genders, ages, and ethnicities.
      Example: To determine the popularity of a shift in the school
      schedule among staff members, a school superintendent ensures that
      adequate representation from all types of school district workers is
      given—teachers, administrators, custodians, bus drivers, etc.
Use margin of error to quantify the quality of a survey’s conclusions.
Margin of error is the maximum expected difference between the actual
parameter and the sample parameter. If a survey is conducted poorly, it will
have a HIGH margin of error. If it is conducted well, it will have a LOW
margin of error.
   Example

If a pollster conducts a poll that says 40% of the voters will vote in favor of
Candidate 1, with a 3% margin of error, which of the following could be the
actual value of the percent of votes cast in the election for Candidate 1?

     (A) 35%
     (B) 38%
     (C) 44%
     (D) 47%

   Solution
Since the margin of error is 3%, that means that the actual results are
projected to be between ± 3% of 40%, so between 37% and 43%. So, the
correct answer is choice (B), since 38% falls within this range.

Drawing Conclusions


                                  SAT Math Strategy
  Limit generalizations about a survey to what is directly supported by the results.



   Example 1

A researcher asks 100 randomly selected survey participants in a city their
favorite place for outdoor exercise. The survey has a low response rate, and
the researcher concludes that the residents are not exercising sufficiently
and that a “Get Outdoors Health Campaign” is needed to motivate city
residents to exercise outdoors. Is this conclusion warranted based on the
given information?

   Solution
No, it is not supported by the given information since there are many
potential reasons why the response rate to the survey could be low:
     Perhaps the deadline to return the survey was too short.
     Perhaps the surveys did not reach the participants.
     Perhaps the potential respondents did not want to participate in
     research.
Moreover, the survey did not ask participants if they exercise outside—
instead, it only asked their favorite location to do so. Given what the survey
asked, a conclusion about whether or not city residents are exercising
outside and need to be motivated with an advertising campaign cannot be
drawn.

   Example 2
A city worker wants to determine the percent of the city’s residents that are
fluent in both Spanish and English. The worker writes the survey in Spanish
and mails it to 400 randomly selected addresses in the city. Thirty of the
surveys are returned, and 90% of them state that their household members
are fluent in both Spanish and English. Would it be correct to generalize
that 90% of the town’s residents are fluent in both Spanish and English?

   Solution
No, because of the survey design. If household members were not able to
read Spanish, they would not be able to understand the survey and could not
respond. Therefore, households in which the residents were only fluent in
English would be far less likely to be included in the results. Households
that were able to read Spanish would understand the instructions and would
be much more likely to respond, skewing the results to show a higher
proportion of bilingual households.

Practice Drill—Problem Solving and Data Analysis: Surveys
(If timing, take about 12 minutes to complete.)
To find out which world language they wanted to study in high school, 250
 unior high students were surveyed. Of the students surveyed, 75 indicated
 hey wanted to study Chinese. Which conclusion is best supported by this
data?

(A) Approximately 30% of the junior high students surveyed were
    interested in studying Chinese.
(B) Approximately 75% of the junior high students surveyed were interested
    in studying Chinese.
(C) Approximately 25% of all students in the town were interested in
    studying Chinese.
(D) Approximately 35% of all students in the town were interested in
    studying Chinese.

According to a recent student survey, 40% of high school seniors in the
United States have taken a college credit class while in high school. If there
are 3.7 million students in this year’s high school graduating class in the
United States, approximately how many of these graduating students likely
 ook a college credit class while in high school?

(A) 148,000
(B) 222,000
(C) 1,480,000
(D) 2,220,000

For an upcoming election, a pollster estimates that 55% of voters will vote
for Ballot Issue #1, given a margin of error of ± 3%. If there are 200,000
voters in the upcoming election, what would the pollster estimate to be the
number, x, who will vote for Ballot Issue #1?

(A) 90, 000 < x < 96, 000
(B) 104, 000 < x < 116, 000
(C) 120, 000 < x < 124, 000
(D) 224, 000 < x < 248, 000
A newspaper surveyed 2,000 likely voters about their preference for a
candidate in the upcoming election. The results are compiled in the table
below:
                         Candidate                                            Vote Total
                         Candidate A                                             980
                         Candidate B                                             764
                         Candidate C                                             155
                        No Preference                                            101

Based on these results, which of the following would be a true statement?

A) 49% of the survey respondents preferred candidate A.
B) 98% of the survey respondents preferred candidate A.
C) 16% of survey respondents preferred candidate C.
D) 46% of survey respondents preferred candidate C.


A randomly selected survey of 2,000 dentists finds that 600 prefer Brand A
dental floss. Based on this information, out of a group of 1,000 randomly
selected dentists, how many will likely prefer Brand A dental floss?

(A) 200
(B) 300
(C) 800
(D) 900

A political scientist conducts a survey about approval for a state’s governor.
The results of the random sample of registered voters in the state are given in
he table below:
      % Who Approve                 % Who Disapprove                        Margin of Error
              55                              45                                   5

What action by the political scientist would most likely decrease the survey’s margin of error?

A) Conduct an identical survey in a different state
B) Conduct an identical survey in a different country
C) Decrease the survey sample size
D) Increase the survey sample size
A travel agency wanted to determine which types of vacation destinations
would be most popular for potential clients. They randomly sampled 100
adults within the boundaries of the travel agency’s city and found that the
majority of the respondents preferred a beach destination. What is the largest
group for which these results of the market survey could accurately be
generalized?

(A) The child residents of the travel agency’s city
(B) The adult residents of the travel agency’s city
(C) All residents of the travel agency’s city
(D) All citizens of the travel agency’s country

A medical researcher surveyed a random sample of nursing home residents
and estimated between 46% and 54% of the residents had a family member
who lived within 25 miles. What is another way she could report her
estimate?

(A) 25% with an 8% margin of error
(B) 46% with an 8% margin of error
(C) 50% with a 4% margin of error
(D) 54% with a 4% margin of error

At an arboretum, a botanist found that out of 100 randomly selected trees
from the arboretum, 30 were evergreen and 70 were deciduous. If there were
a total of 1,000 trees in the arboretum, which inequality expresses how many
of the remaining trees, E, would have to be evergreen if more than half of all
 he trees in the arboretum were evergreen?

(A) E > 470
(B) E < 470
(C) E > 590
(D) E < 590
One hundred randomly selected users of a television streaming service were
surveyed as to their preferred use for the service. Of these, 35% preferred to
“binge watch” one show until they had seen all the episodes for that show,
and 65% preferred to skip around to watch different shows. What is the most
accurate conclusion based on these results?

(A) It is more likely that a randomly selected user of the service prefers
    binge watching to show skipping.
(B) It is more likely that a randomly selected user of the service prefers
    show skipping to binge watching.
(C) Exactly 65% of all users of the streaming service prefer binge watching
    over show skipping.
(D) Exactly 65% of all users of the streaming service prefer show skipping
    over binge watching.

 Solutions

(A) We can eliminate choices (C) and (D) since the survey is limited to
students at the junior high and would not be representative of all students in
 he town. The correct answer is choice (A) because 75 of the 250 junior high
students said they wanted to study Chinese—this equates to 30%.



(C) Based on the survey data, 40% of high school seniors in the United States
have taken a college credit class. Therefore, if we take 40% of the total
number of students in the United States who are graduating from high school,
we will get the approximate number of the graduating students who likely
 ook a college credit class:

(B) Since the margin of error is 3%, the likely number of voters will be
between 52% and 58% of the 200,000 total.
So, the estimated number of voters who will vote for Ballot Issue #1 is 104,
000 < x < 116, 000.

(A) There are 2,000 total respondents to the survey, so determine what
percent of this total Candidate A would be:



Thus, 49% of survey respondents preferred Candidate A. The other options
are based on incorrect calculations with the vote totals in the table.

(B) Set up a proportion to solve for the number of dentists out of the 1,000
randomly selected ones who will prefer Brand A:

Cross multiply →




(D) To decrease the margin of error, make the survey sample as large and as
random as possible. Choices (A) and (B) are incorrect because conducting the
same survey in a different location will not better inform us about the
approval within the state; they would be conducting the studies outside the
considered population. Choice (D) is correct because increasing the sample
size will make the survey data set larger, therefore decreasing the margin of
error.

(B) The travel agency did a random sample of adults within the boundaries of
 he travel agency’s city, so the generalization will be for adult residents of
 hat city. It will not be choice (A) since children were not surveyed. It will
not be choice (C) because that would include both children and adults in the
generalization. And it will not be choice (D) because we do not know the
specifics of other areas in the country and how they would respond.

(C) The number 50 is halfway between 46 and 54, with 4 units separating 46
from 50 and 4 units separating 54 from 50. So, the researcher could report the
estimate as 50% with a 4% margin of error since this would encompass
values between 46% and 54%.

(A) One hundred trees have already been selected, so there would be 1, 000 −
100 = 900 trees remaining. Half of all the trees in the arboretum would be
500. In the survey sample, there were 30 evergreen trees. So, there must be
enough evergreen trees in the remaining 900 to give a total of over 500.
Solve this inequality to reach the solution:

(B) Choices (C) and (D) assert too much precision by stating that “exactly”
65% of the users must have a particular preference. Since 65% of the survey
respondents said they like to skip around to different shows, and only 35% of
 he respondents preferred to binge watch, it would be reasonable to conclude
 hat a randomly selected user of the service prefers show skipping to binge
watching.

 Problem Solving and Data Analysis—Graphs and Data
 Interpretation

 Probability
 Probability is defined as “the likelihood that a given event will happen,”
 expressed as a decimal or fraction.
      If the probability that it will rain tomorrow is 0.5, there is a 50%
      chance it will rain.
      If the probability that it will snow tomorrow is 0, there is a 0% chance
      it will snow.
      If the probability that it will be cloudy tomorrow is 1, there is a 100%
      chance it will be cloudy.

 To calculate probability, take the number of ways an event can happen and
 divide it by the total number of possible outcomes:
    Example
 If I have a total of 30 books on my bookshelf and 10 of them are novels,
 what is the probability that a randomly selected book from my bookshelf
 would be a novel?

    Solution

 The “number of ways an event can happen” is 10 and the “total number of
 possible outcomes” is 30, so divide 10 by 30 to determine the probability:

 So, the probability that a randomly selected book from the bookshelf would
 be a novel is .

 Practice
On a multiple-choice test, there are four choices per question: (A), (B), (C),
and (D). What is the probability that on a given question a test taker who is
randomly selecting his answer will select choice (B)?
In John’s wallet, he has five one-dollar bills, two five-dollar bills, and three
 en-dollar bills. If a bill is selected at random from his wallet, what is the
possibility it will be a five-dollar bill?
An advertiser finds that for 200 randomly selected online ad placements, six
users will click through to the business website. Based on this data, what is
 he probability that a randomly selected ad placement will result in the user
clicking through to the business website?

 Solutions
There are a total of four possible events, and choice (B) is one of the potential
outcomes. So, divide 1 by 4 to find the probability: .
John has a total of 5 + 2 + 3 = 10 bills in his wallet. Out of these ten bills,
 wo are five-dollar bills. So, divide 2 by 10 to find the probability:

There are 6 possible events out of 200 potential outcomes, so divide 6 by 200
o determine the probability:
So, the probability that a randomly selected ad placement will result in the
user clicking through to the business website is 0.03.

 Graph Interpretation
 The SAT will assess your skill in interpreting a variety of graphs—you will
 be asked to find maximums, minimums, overall trends, and more.


                                    SAT Math Strategy
    Carefully examine the units on the axes to avoid careless errors.



    Example




 The number of graduates per year from Jackson High School are given in
 the line graph above.
 During what year of this time period was the number of graduates the
 greatest?

    Solution
Examine the graph to see that the x-axis has the “years” and the y-axis has
“grads per year.” So, we need to find where the “grads per year” are at their
highest value and the corresponding year.




Drawing on the graph will help you visualize that the greatest number of
grads per year is approximately 370, and that this occurs in year 2016. So,
the answer is 2016.

Practice
A delivery driver plots how far he is from his home throughout his
workday.
How far from home is the worker when he starts his workday?

For approximately how long is the driver at least 5 miles from home?
A teacher has a total of 100 minutes he can spend grading essays and group
projects. The various ways he could allocate his time are graphed below:




If the teacher spends the full 100 minutes grading projects and essays, and he
grades 5 group projects, how many essays will he grade within this time?

How long does it take for him to grade an essay?
 Solutions

2 miles. Zero hours of working would correspond to the beginning of the
driver’s workday. At an x value of 0, the y value is 2 for the number of miles
away from home. So, he will be 2 miles from home when he starts his
workday.

5 hours. From 1 hour spent working to 6 hours spent working, the miles
away from home is at least 5. So, there will be a total of 6 − 1 = 5 hours he is
at least 5 miles from home.

10 essays. Examine the line and find that when there are 5 group projects
graded, the y- value representing the number of essays graded is 10. So, there
will be 10 essays graded in this time.

5 minutes. To find this, look at the situation when the teacher does nothing
but grade essays. This is at the point (0, 20)—no group projects are graded,
and 20 essays would be graded. Since the teacher is spending a total of 100
minutes grading, find the number of minutes it takes to grade a single essay
by dividing 100 minutes by 20 essays:

 Scatterplots
 Scatterplots provide a graph of different points that together will show a
 relationship among data. To see the relationship among the data, visualize a
 line of best fit that shows a line that would best approximate the data
 points. (On the SAT, the edge of your scrap paper can give you a great way
 to approximate a straight line.) Here is an example of a scatterplot with a
 line of best fit:

    Examples
 Consider the line of best fit for the scatterplot graphed below.
What is the equation for the line of best fit, with the slope and y-intercept
rounded to the nearest whole integer values?

    Solution

 Be careful to examine the x- and y-coordinates in the graph—they do not
 begin at (0, 0). First, pick two points for which it will be easy to find the
 slope: (10, 60) and (15, 80) will work.




 So, the slope of the line is 4. Now, plug in a point that is in the line of best
 fit, such as (10, 60), to solve for the y-intercept:



 Plug in 4 for m, the slope:
Plug in (10, 60) as a point to solve for b:




So, the equation for the line of best fit is y = 4x + 20 since the line has a
slope of 4 and a y-intercept of 20.

2. Which point is an “outlier”—an observation that lies farthest from the
   values predicted by the line of best fit?

   Solution

Find the point that is most distant from the line of best fit:




(11.5, 70) is about 4 units above the predicted value for the line of best fit.
So, this would be an outlier in the graph.

Practice
 Twenty commuters recorded the distance from their homes to work and the
 time of their commutes on a particular day.

Based on the line of best fit, if someone lived 4 miles from work, how long
would their commute time most likely be?
What value on the graph is most different from what would be predicted
based on the trend?
For how many of the commuters was their actual commute time shorter than
what would be predicted?

 Solutions
 1.
At 4 miles from home to work, the predicted number of commuting minutes
is approximately 10, as you can see in the graph above.

2.




The value that is most different from what is predicted is the point (2.9, 4.6)
—this point is an “outlier” since it is far away from the line of best fit.
3. Mark and count the number of points that fall underneath the line of
   best fit:




There are 6 points that fall underneath the line of best fit, so there are 6
commuters for whom the commute was shorter than predicted.

Histograms
Histograms are also known as bar graphs—they show the frequency of
different values in a data set.

   Example
Based on the above graph, between what two days was there the largest
increase in temperature?

  Solution
From Wednesday to Thursday, the temperature increases from
approximately 52 degrees to 80 degrees. From the graph, this is clearly the
largest increase from day to day.

Practice

1.
  During which months was the total monthly rainfall greater than 20
  inches?

2. Which of the following best approximates the range in monthly rainfall
   over the course of a year?

  (A) 9
  (B) 17
  (C) 22
  (D) 26




  The graph above shows the distribution of the number of 20 total
  students who read a certain number of books over the summer. Use this
  graph to answer questions 3–4.

3. How many total students read just 2 or just 3 books?

4. If another student is added to the set who read 7 books over the summer,
   what will be the effect on the median number of books read and mean
   number of books read?
    (A) Median decreases, while the mean remains the same.
    (B) Both the median and the mean decrease.
    (C) Median remains the same, and the mean increases.
    (D) Both the median and the mean increase.

 Solutions

April has rainfall of 23 inches, and May has rainfall of 26 inches, while all
he other months have less than 20 inches of rain. So, just April and May
would have total monthly rainfall greater than 20 inches.

The range of a data set is defined as the difference between the largest and
smallest values in the set. May has the most rainfall at 26 inches, and July has
 he least rainfall at 9 inches. So, the difference between the two is 26 − 9 = 17
giving a range for the data of choice (B), 17.




The graph above shows the distribution of the number of students who read a
certain number of books over the summer.

Six students read 2 books and 5 students read 3 books, so the total number of
students who read just 2 or 3 books is 6 + 5 = 11.
Given that there are 20 students total, the median will fall between the 10th
and 11th terms in the set. In this case, the 10th and 11th terms are both
students who read 2 books, so the median number of books read will not
change even if a greater value is added to the set since a new median with 21
 otal students will remain at 2 books read. The mean, however, will change
since it is a calculation of the average number of books read. An additional
student who read 7 books would slightly increase the mean since the sum of
all the books read would be greater. Thus, the answer is (C).

 Tables
 The SAT will frequently present data in a table form. When analyzing
 tables, be sure you clearly understand what the numbers in each cell
 represent. Do so by carefully matching the cells up with the corresponding
 descriptions.

    Example

 Air Quality Index, or AQI, is a measure used to determine how safe it is to
 be outside given the air pollution that is in an area. The index ranges
 between 0 and 500, and measures of 151 or above are considered unsafe for
 the general public. Sixty cities in a country had their average AQI for two
 months measured, with the results tabulated below:




 What is the probability that one of the surveyed cities would have an unsafe
 AQI for the general population over both months surveyed?

    Solution
Let’s be clear about what the numbers in the table represent (don’t worry—
you don’t need to be this thorough for every problem; this is so you can
clearly see how these tables work):
     40 is the number of cities that had the lower AQI in both January and
     February.
     10 is the number of cities that had a greater AQI in January and a
     lower AQI in February.
     4 is the number of cities that had a greater AQI in February and a
     lower AQI in January.
     6 is the number of cities that had a greater AQI in both January and
     February.
     44 is the total number of cities that had a lower AQI in January.
     16 is the total number of cities that had a higher AQI in January.
     50 is the total number of cities that had a lower AQI in February.
     10 is the total number of cities that had a higher AQI in February.
     There are 60 cities all together that were presented.
So, to calculate the probability that one of the surveyed cities would have
an unsafe AQI (over 151) over both months, first see how many cities had
the greater AQI in both January and February—there were 6 such cities.
Then, divide this by the total number of cities presented, 60.



  So the probability that one of the surveyed cities would have an unsafe
AQI over both months is



Practice

      Type of Math Class and Type of Class Instructor at a
                          University
How many instructors in total taught lower-level classes?
How many instructors were there all together at the university?
What percent of all the math classes are taught by professors, calculated to
 he nearest whole percent?
If a math class is taught by a graduate student, what is the probability the
class is an upper-level class?

 Solutions

120. Match up the Lower-Level Class with the Totals and see that there are
120 total instructors for lower-level classes.

185. The bottom right cell shows how many total instructors of all types and
all classes were at the university—185.

46%. There are a total of 185 classes, and out of these 185 classes, 85 are
 aught by professors. So, calculate the percent of classes taught by professors
 ike this:

0.2. There are 100 total math classes taught by graduate students, and 20 of
 hese classes are upper level. So, to calculate the probability, divide 20 by
100:

 Box Plots
 On occasion, you may come across box plots (a.k.a. whisker plots) on the
 SAT Math, called this because the two quartiles (fourths) of the data that are
 in the middle make a box (the least and most quartiles make “whiskers” on
 either side). These plots break up the values in the data set into four
quadrants so you can more easily visualize the spread of the data and the
median.

   Example




The box plot above summarizes the values for the average monthly
apartment rental price in a particular neighborhood. Which of the following
would be closest to the median monthly apartment rental price in this
neighborhood?

     (A) 500
     (B) 600
     (C) 800
     (D) 1,200




   Solution
From this, you can see that the median value would be approximately 800,
making choice (C) the correct answer.

Practice
 The above box plot summarizes the test results from a group of 300 seniors
 at a high school.

What is the minimum test score?
What is the median test score?
Which expression would give the test results, x, between the 50th and 75th
percentiles?
      (A) 5 < x < 35
      (B) 35 < x < 70
      (C) 70 < x < 95
      (D) 95 < x < 100

 Solutions
The very least value in the plot is 5.
In the middle of the box is the value 70, which would represent the median.
The test results between the 50th and 75th percentiles would be between the
2nd and 3rd quartiles. This would be between the median, 70, and the 3rd
quartile, 95. So, the correct answer is choice (C).

 Linear and Exponential Growth
 A constant relationship between two variables is called a linear
 relationship. Linear growth occurs when the equation formed by the
 variables has a positive slope; as the x value increases, the y value also
 increases. Linear decay occurs when the equation formed by the variables
 has a negative slope; as the x value increases, the y value decreases.

    Example 1
 Linear growth for the equation y = x + 1
   Example 2

Linear decay for the equation y = − x + 3
A relationship between two variables x and y that is expressed in the form y
= a bx or y = a bx + c is exponential. Exponential growth occurs when as the
x value increases, the y value increases exponentially. Exponential decay
occurs when as the x value increases, the y value decreases exponentially.

   Example 3

Twenty sheep were introduced to an island where they had no natural
predators. The population of the sheep on the island over time is given in
the table below.

                      Year                Number of Sheep
                       1800                        20
                       1810                        28
                       1820                        38
                       1830                        51
                       1840                        65
If a function were made with the year as the x value and the number of
sheep as f(x), what would best describe the relationship between x and f(x)
if it were graphed in the xy-coordinate plane?

    (A) Exponential growth
    (B) Exponential decay
    (C) Linear growth
    (D) Linear decay

   Solution
Let’s examine how much the number of sheep changes from year to year:

                                                   Increase from 10
              Year           Number of Sheep         Years Prior
               1800                   20               Not applicable
               1810                   28                    +8
               1820                   38                    +10
               1830                   51                    +13
               1840                   65                    +14


We can see that not only is the number of sheep increasing, the number by
which it is increasing in each interval is also increasing. If this had been
linear growth, the number by which it increases in each interval would
remain the same. So, the correct answer is choice (A), exponential growth.

Practice
The line of best fit for the points given in the graph above would show what
ype of relationship between A and B?

(A) Negative linear association
(B) Positive linear association
(C) Negative exponential association
(D) Positive exponential association

If the trend given in the above graph were to continue, what would be closest
 o the projected value of B when A is 6?

(A) 5
(B) 5.5
(C) 6
(D) 6.5

John wishes to place $1,000 in an investment. Which of these circumstances
would provide him with the greatest amount of money after a ten-year
period?

(A) An investment that grows linearly at 7% of the original amount each
    year
(B) An investment that has exactly $60 added each year
(C) An investment in which 2% of the original amount and $45 is added
    each year
(D) An investment that grows exponentially at 6% a year, compounded
    annually

 Solutions

As the x values increase, the y values also increase at a steady rate. Therefore,
 his will be choice (B), a positive linear association.
Be careful to notice that the increments on the x-axis are different from those
on the y-axis. For each increase in 1 whole unit of x, the y value increases by
about 1 whole unit. So, when A is 6, the B value would be 1 more than what
 t was at the point (5, 5). So, the projected value for B would be choice (C),
6, since the new point would be approximately (6, 6).
Choices (A), (B), and (C) would all result in linear growth—a set amount of
money would be added each year. Choice (D) is correct because with
exponential growth, the amount by which the investment increases will
 ncrease, resulting in far greater growth over time.

 Interpreting Constants and Functions
 In order to assess your skill in understanding the meaning of functions, the
 SAT Math will frequently ask you to interpret constants and other
 components of functions.

    Example
 Mary’s investment in a stock portfolio, S, is modeled by the function
in which y is the number of years Mary holds the stock. What is the best
interpretation of the number 1.15 in the context of this function?

     (A) When Mary holds the investment for 1.15 years, her overall
         investment increases by $1,000.
     (B) When Mary holds the investment for 0.15 years, her overall
         investment decreases by $1,000.
     (C) For each year that Mary owns the stock portfolio, her investment
         balance increases by $15.
     (D) For each year that Mary owns the stock portfolio, her investment
         balance increases by 15% compounded annually.

  Solution
Use your knowledge of other concepts to help you interpret the meaning of
constants in functions. Recall from the review of percentages that the
formula for compound interest is                  , which has the same
structure as the function S(y) = 1000 (1.15)y. The number 1.15 will
correspond to        . Since the intervals at which the investment value is
compounded are one year, given the exponent y,            will equal
               . This means that the percent increase each year is 15%.
Therefore, the correct answer is choice (D), since each year that she owns
the portfolio, her investment balance will increase by 15%.
    You could also use process of elimination to figure this out, since
choices (A), (B), and (C) would all correspond to linear growth.

Practice
A chemist measured the amount of caffeine in different volumes of coffee:

                Fluid Ounces            Milligrams of Caffeine
                      2                            25
                      5                            60
                      8                            95
                        12                             143


Which of the following functions best approximates the relationship between
fluid ounces, F, and milligrams of caffeine, C?

(A) C = 4F
(B) C = 8F
(C) C = 12F
(D) C = 16F

Given the relationship in the above table, which of the following would best
approximate the milligrams of caffeine in 15 fluid ounces of coffee?

(A) 150
(B) 165
(C) 180
(D) 195
 Questions 3–4 refer to the following information:
 The half-life formula for a given substance is




 in which N(t) is how much of the original amount of a substance, N0,
 remains after a certain amount of time t elapsed, and h is the half-life of the
 substance.

What would the value of N(5)represent?

(A) How long it takes for half of a substance to decay
(B) How much of the substance would remain after 5 years had elapsed
(C) The number of years it takes for a substance to fully decay
(D) The original mass of a substance before calculation of its half-life
Suppose that a particular substance has a half-life of 20 years. What fraction
of the substance in the year 2000 would remain in the year 2080?
(A)
(B)
(C)
(D)

 Solutions

Glance ahead to the solutions to see that all of them are written in slope-
 ntercept form. Determine which equation is correct by approximating the
slope of the line. Let’s use the points (2, 25) and (5, 60):

This corresponds to choice (C), since 12 is the closest slope value to 11.67.

When there is an increase of 3 fluid ounces from 5 to 8, the milligrams of
caffeine increases by 35, from 60 to 95. So, when going from 12 fluid ounces
 o 15 fluid ounces, the milligrams of caffeine will increase by a similar
amount: 143 + 35 = 178. This is closest to choice (C), 180.
Alternatively, you could have used the equation from the previous problem to
solve for the number of milligrams, plugging in 15 for F.

N(5) would represent the choice (B) since t is the amount of time that would
go by, and if t is 5, then N(5) would represent how much of the substance
would remain after 5 half-lives had elapsed.

If the half-life is 20 years, according to the equation, half of the original
amount of the substance would decay in a 20-year period. Since the time span
 s 80 years, going from 2000 to 2080, the original amount of the substance
would be halved a total of 4 times:

So, the correct answer is (A) since there would be    of the original amount.
 Practice Drill #1—Problem Solving and Data Analysis Graphs
 and Data Interpretation
 (If timing, take about 12 minutes to complete.)
 The complete distribution of letter grades on a final exam are given in the
 table below:

                 Letter Grade              Number of Students
                        A                            12
                        B                            16
                        C                            10
                        D                             7
                        F                             5


What is the total number of students who completed the exam?

(A) 40
(B) 50
(C) 60
(D) 70

Which set of grades represents    of the total number of students?

(A) A and B
(B) A and D
(C) C and D
(D) C and F
According to the graph above, what best approximates the initial temperature
of the water?

(A) 70 degrees
(B) 90 degrees
(C) 100 degrees
(D) 120 degrees

Consider the graph above. A cook wanted to cook pasta during a 15-minute
 ime period when the water temperature was steady. To accomplish this goal,
between what times after starting to heat the water did the cook have the
pasta in the water?

(A) 0–10 minutes
(B) 10–15 minutes
(C) 15–30 minutes
(D) 30–40 minutes


 Questions 5–7 are about the following information.
      A marketing agency surveyed clients from different online businesses
      to find the e-commerce conversion rate, i.e., what percentage of
      website visitors purchased something from the business. The results
      are compiled below:
                   Business Type                       Conversion Rate
                  Industrial Supplies                        4%
                     Pet Supplies                            9%
                     Booksellers                            10%
                     Electronics                            26%
                         Toys                               12%
                  Business Supplies                         21%


Based on the above table, what is the probability that a visitor to an online
bookstore will make a purchase?

(A) 0.1
(B) 0.2
(C) 0.3
(D) 0.4

If an online electronics business has 2,000 visitors to its site in a month, how
many of them would most likely purchase something?

(A) 440
(B) 520
(C) 650
(D) 860

What is the median conversion rate for the business types presented in the
able?

(A) 5%
(B) 7%
(C) 9%
(D) 11%




The relationship between temperature and grams of water per kilogram of air
n the above graph is best described as which of the following?

(A) Exponentially increasing
(B) Exponentially decreasing
(C) Linear increasing
(D) Linear decreasing

What is the predicted value of grams of water per kilogram of air at 25
degrees C?

(A) 16
(B) 20
(C) 24
(D) 28
The greatest outlier presented in the above graph is found at what
emperature?

(A) 10 degrees
(B) 20 degrees
(C) 30 degrees
(D) 40 degrees

 Solutions

(B) Add up the total number of students from the right column to find the
 otal number of students who completed the exam:



(D) Find what     of the total of 50 students would be:



Then, examine which combination will add up to 15. The only one that does
s choice (D), C and F, since 10 + 5 = 15.

(A) The initial temperature of the water is the temperature when 0 minutes
have passed. At an x value of 0, the y value for temperature is closest to 70
degrees.

(C) For the temperature to be steady, the line must be horizontal, having a
slope of zero. Between 15 and 30 minutes, the line is horizontal, so it is in
 hat range that the cook should cook the pasta.

(A) Look at the percentage of conversion for booksellers—10%. Then,
expresses this as a probability:
(B) The conversion rate for electronics businesses is 26% according to the
 able. So, find 26% of 2,000 to predict how many of the business’s visitors
will likely purchases something:

(D) Put the percentages in order from least to greatest:


Since there are an even number of terms, and the two middle terms are
different, find the median of the set by averaging 10 and 12:



So, the median conversion rate is 11%.

(A) As the temperature increases, the grams of water per kg of air increase
more and more. Had this been a constant increase, it would be linear. Since
 he increase accelerates, it would be an exponential increase.

(B) The predicted value and measured value differ—the measured value is
 ndicated by the dot, while the predicted value will be on the curved, dotted
 ine. At 25 degrees Celsius, the grams of water per kilogram of air would be
20.

(D) The greatest outlier is the value that most differs from the predicted
value; in other words, it is the measured value that is farthest from the curve.
At 40 degrees, the measured value of the grams is 50, while the curve would
predict approximately 55. This point is farther away from the predicted
values than any of the other dots presented in the graph.

 Practice Drill #2—Problem Solving and Data Analysis Graphs
 and Data Interpretation
 (If timing, take about 12 minutes to complete.)
Sam took a balloon ride, in which he ascended to a height of 60 meters and
remained there for a period of time. His height in meters above the ground as
 t relates to hours after taking off is graphed above.
For how many hours in his ride did he stay at his maximum height?

(A) 1
(B) 2
(C) 3
(D) 4

During what interval did Sam’s height make the greatest change?

(A) Between 0–2 hours
(B) Between 2–4 hours
(C) Between 4–6 hours
(D) Between 6–8 hours
Consider the set of data in the scatterplot above.
Assuming the trend in the above graph were to continue, what would most
ikely be the y value of the predicted point with an x value of 25?

(A) 5
(B) 10
(C) 15
(D) 20

If a linear equation were made to represent this data, which of the following
would most closely estimate its y-intercept?

(A) 48
(B) 60
(C) 75
(D) 90
A survey of 200 online shoppers asked respondents their favorite product to
purchase on the internet. Their responses are summarized in the table below.
                        Item                     Percent of Those
                                                    Surveyed
                     Books/Music                        17
                      Technology                        18
                        Clothing                        22
                    Online Education                    6
                         Trips                          11
                     Reused Goods                       19
                         Other                          7


Based on this table, how many of the 200 respondents primarily preferred
reused goods, trips, or clothing?

(A) 104
(B) 132
(C) 150
(D) 178

                                                          Expected Yearly
                                                           Management
        Fund Name                      Share Price       Expenses per Share
           Fund A                         $140                  $1.12
           Fund B                          $80                  $0.64
           Fund C                         $200                  $1.60
           Fund D                          $64                  $0.51
           Fund E                          $50                  $0.40


The table above shows the price per share and the estimated yearly expenses
for five different actively managed mutual funds (investment products that
purchase stocks in many different companies).
If Jennifer purchased 200 shares of Fund C, what would her yearly fund
expenses most likely be?
(A) $100
(B) $190
(C) $240
(D) $320

Which function best approximates the relationship between the share price, S,
and expenses, E, given that the two quantities have a linear relationship?

(A) (0.008)S = E
(B) (0.08)S = E
(C) (0.8)S = E
(D) (8)S = E

If William purchased 100 shares of Fund D, what inequality shows the
percentage return on the investment that would allow him to make enough
money to cover his expected yearly management expenses, calculated to the
nearest tenth of a percent?

(A) Percent ≤ 0.8
(B) Percent ≥ 0.8
(C) Percent ≥ 1.2
(D) Percent ≤ 1.2
                                      Figure 1


Assuming the trend of the best fit line in Figure 1 continues, what would be
he mass of flower A if it has a height of 55 cm?

(A) Approximately 12.5 grams
(B) Approximately 16 grams
(C) Approximately 19.5 grams
(D) Approximately 24 grams
                                     Figure 2


Based on Figure 2, in which of the following ranges would one find the
median petal length of flower A?

(A) 3–4 cm
(B) 4–5 cm
(C) 5–6 cm
(D) 6–7 cm

 Solutions

(C) The maximum height of the balloon is at 60 meters, and Sam is at this
height between 3 and 6 hours of flight, for a total of 3 hours.

(D) During the interval between 6 and 8 hours, Sam’s height decreased by 60
meters. This is a greater change than that of any of the other intervals,
 ncluding between 0–2 hours when Sam’s height increased by 50 meters.

(B) Continue the same trend as illustrated in the graph. Since 25 is 5 more
 han 20, determine how much the y value decreases during a similar interval.
Between x values of 15 and 20, the y value decreases from approximately 36
 o 23, for a decrease of 13 units. So, to predict the y value when x is 20,
subtract 13 from 23 (which is the y value when x is 20):

Therefore, the predicted value would be 10.

(C) Be careful to examine the units of the graph—the x-axis begins at 10
rather than 0. So, to find the y-intercept, we need to determine what that point
of intersection on the y-axis would be if we expanded the graph by 10 lesser x
units. This could be accomplished by plugging in sample values, finding the
slope of the equation, and then solving for the y-intercept. Fortunately, you
can save time in this problem—determine how much the y value increases as
 he x value decreases from 20 to 10. This number will be identical to how
much the y value increases as the x value decreases from 10 to 0, enabling us
 o find the y-intercept. Between 20 and 10, the y value increases from 23 to
49, for a total increase of 49 − 23 = 26. So, increase the y value at the x value
of 10, namely 49, by 26 units to find the y-intercept: 49 + 26 = 75.

(A) Add the percentages who preferred reused goods (19), trips (11), and
clothing (22): 19% + 11% + 22% = 52%. Then, take 52% of 200:



(D) Each share of Fund C has a per-share management expense of $1.60. So,
multiply 1.60 by 200 to find her likely yearly fund expenses:

Therefore, her yearly fund expenses would most likely be $320.

(A) Find the relationship between share price and expenses by setting up an
equation using sample values. Let’s use a share price of 200 and a
corresponding expense amount of 1.60, and call k the constant for which we

are solving (since the terms have a linear relationship):


So, (0.008)S = E would best approximate the relationship between the share
price and expenses.
(B) For a single share of Fund D, the percent of fund expenses are calculated
as follows:



The percent of fund expenses would remain the same no matter how many
shares William had. So, to express the percentage return on his investment
 hat he would need to have to cover his expected yearly management
expenses, William would need Percent ≥ 0.8, since 0.8 would approximate
0.797 to the nearest tenth.

(C) When the height of the flower increases from 45–50 centimeters, the
mass of the flower increases by approximately 3 grams, going from 13.5 to
16.5 grams. So, increase the flower’s mass when it is at 50 cm in height by a
similar amount of 3 grams, since there is a steady, linear relationship between
 he flower’s height and mass. 16.5 + 3 = 19.5 grams, corresponding to choice
(C).

(C) In a box plot, the line at which the two boxes meet is the median. In this
graph, this occurs at approximately 5.25 cm. Therefore, the median will be
within the range of 5–6 cm.


 Geometry and Trigonometry
 This section contains comprehensive review and strategies for all of the
 concepts below:

 Area, Perimeter, and Volume
   Rectangle Area
   Triangle Area
   Perimeter of Polygons
   Parallelogram Area
   Trapezoid Area
   Surface Area
   Volume of a Box, Cylinder, Sphere, Cone, and Pyramid
Lines, Angles, and Triangles
 Supplementary Angles
 Vertical Angles
 Parallel Lines and a Transversal

Angles, Triangles, and Quadrilaterals
 Equilateral Triangles
 Isosceles Triangles
 Similar Triangles
 Angles in a Quadrilateral

Right Triangles and Trigonometry
 Pythagorean Theorem and Special Right Triangles
 Sine, Cosine, Tangent
 Area of an Equilateral Triangle
 Sine and Cosine of Complementary Angles

Circles
 Radius and Diameter
 Area and Circumference
 360° in a Circle
 Inscribed Angle
 Arc Length
 Sector Area
 Circle Formula
 Radians

Area, Perimeter, and Volume
At the beginning of each math test section, the SAT will provide you with a
formula sheet that covers much of what you will need for problems related
to area, perimeter, and volume.
KEY FACTS:
A circle has 360 degrees.
There are 2π radians in a circle.
There are 180 degrees in a triangle.


                                SAT Math Strategy
 Even though many geometry formulas are provided, you should memorize these formulas so
 you have them at your fingertips. Memorizing the formulas will help you quickly remember
 what formula you will need for a given problem. Also, if you memorize the formulas, you
 will have a better sense of what all the variables and constants mean and how to apply them.
As you can see from above, the SAT provides you with area formulas for
two important shapes: the rectangle and the triangle.

Rectangle Area

The area of a rectangle is calculated as follows:




   Example
What is the area of a rectangle with a length of 6 units and a width of 4
units?

   Solution

Multiply the length by the width to find the area:



So, the area of the rectangle would be 24 square units.

Triangle Area
The SAT also provides you with the formula for the area of a triangle:




Note: In your math class, you may have learned this formula as           .
This formula is perfectly fine to use as well.
   Example
What is the area of the triangle drawn below?




   Solution
When calculating the area of triangles, parallelograms, and trapezoids,
remember that the height is perpendicular to the base. On this particular
problem, the base is 7 and the height is 3 (not 4). To calculate the area of


the triangle, use the triangle area formula:
So, the triangle’s area will be 10.5 square units.
    Now, let’s consider the polygon concepts the SAT expects you to know,
but for which you do not receive formulas.

Perimeter of Polygons

The perimeter of a shape is the length of its sides added together.

   Example 1
What is the perimeter of the rectangle below?
   Solution
In a rectangle, the sides opposite one another are equal. So the total length
of the sides of the rectangle would be 5 + 5 + 8 + 8 = 26 units.

   Example 2
What is the perimeter for the triangle below?




   Solution

Add the three side lengths of the triangle to find the perimeter:



Parallelogram Area
A parallelogram is a four-sided figure that has opposite sides that are
parallel. (A rectangle is a special form of a parallelogram that has only 90°
angles.) The area for a parallelogram is given below:




Be careful that you do not count one of the slanted edges as the height. Like
with the triangle,
the height will always be perpendicular to the base.

   Example

What is the area of the parallelogram drawn below?




   Solution

The base of the parallelogram is 10, and the height is 5 since it is
perpendicular to the base. (The height is not 6 since this side is not
perpendicular to the base.) So, the area is the base multiplied by the height:


The area is therefore 50 square units.

Trapezoid Area
A trapezoid is a four-sided figure that has a pair of opposite sides parallel to
one another. The area for a trapezoid is calculated as follows:




In essence, you are finding the “average” of the two bases and multiplying
this average by the height of the trapezoid. As with the triangle and
parallelogram, be mindful that the height must be perpendicular to the base.

   Example
What is the area of the trapezoid drawn below?




   Solution

Use 4 as B1, 6 as B2, and 3 as the height, plugging these values into the
trapezoid formula:




So, the area of the trapezoid is 15 square units.
  Surface Area

  The SAT may ask you to calculate the surface area of a right rectangular
  prism—this is a fancy way of saying box. To calculate the surface are of a
  box, take the area of each face of the box and add them together using this




  formula:
  Surface Area = 2(lw) + 2(lh) + 2(wh)

      Example
  What is the surface area of a right rectangular prism with a height of 3
  units, a length of 5 units, and a width of 4 units?

      Solution
  Carefully plug 3, 4, and 5 into the surface area formula to find the surface
  area:




  So, the surface area is 94 square units.

  Practice

What is the area of a triangle with a height of 3 units and a base of 4 units?
What is the perimeter of a rectangle with a width of x and length of 2x?
What is the area of the parallelogram below?
  a trapezoid has a height h and an area of 6h square units, what would be the
  ea of a trapezoid with bases of the same length but a height twice that of the
 riginal?
What is the surface area of a cube with an edge length of 3?
  the perimeter of a rectangle is 24 inches, what would be the value of the
  ngth and the width of the rectangle in order to maximize the rectangle’s area?

  Solutions


 here are two sides of length x and two sides of length 2x:



 ase × Height = 6 × 2 = 12
 onsider the area formula for a trapezoid:



 the bases remain the same, and the height is doubled, the original area will
e doubled since the only thing that changes is the height. So, the new area
 ould be 12h.
n a cube, all the edges are of the same length:
o, plug 3 in for length, width, and height in the surface area formula:




 lternatively, you could calculate the surface area for one of the sides, 3 × 3 =
  and multiply this by 6 since there are 6 total sides: 6 × 9 = 54 square units.
o maximize the area of the rectangle while minimizing the perimeter, the
 ctangle should be a square. You can see why this would be by trying out
ome sample values for length and width (that would allow for a perimeter of
4): Length: 6 inches, width: 6 inches. Area is 36 square inches.

ength: 7 inches, width 5 inches. Area is 35 square inches.
ength: 8 inches, width 4 inches. Area is 32 square inches.
ength: 9 inches, width 3 inches. Area is 27 square inches.
o, the length and width should each be 6 inches in order to maximize the area
f the rectangle.

 Volume Calculations
 The volume formulas you need to know are all provided at the beginning of
 each math section. Here are examples showing how to apply each of these
 formulas.

 Volume of a Box (Right Rectangular Prism)




 A common error students make is to confuse area and volume. Area will
 only be a calculation of two dimensions, like length × width. Volume will
 be a calculation of three dimensions, as we can see above.
   Example

What is the volume of box with a length 2x inches, a width of 3x inches,
and a height of y inches?

   Solution
Even though this asks you to calculate expressions with x and y, you can
still use the same formula as above and multiply the length, width, and
height together.



So, the volume would be 6 x2y cubic inches.

Volume of a Cylinder




Think about calculating the volume of a cylinder as taking the area of the
circle on top, then multiplying it by the height all the way down.

   Example
What is the volume of a cylinder with a height of 8 inches and a diameter of
4 inches, as shown below?
   Solution

Be careful to distinguish between the radius and the diameter. The radius is
half the length of the diameter, so the radius for the above cylinder would
be 2. Then, plug 2 in for the radius and 8 in for the height to solve for the
volume:

So, the volume would be 32π cubic inches.

Volume of a Sphere




   Example
Consider the volume of a sphere with a radius of x units. How much greater
will the volume of a sphere with double the radius be?

   Solution
The volume of the original sphere will be        cubic units. The radius of
the second sphere will be 2x, so its volume will be                   cubic
units. Divide the second volume by the first to see the multiple by which it


is greater than the first:

So, the volume of the second sphere will be 8 times greater than the first. If
you realize that the only thing that will change from one sphere to the next
is the radius, you can simply calculate the ratio of the cubes of the radii to
arrive at your solution.

Volume of a Cone




   Example

How many cones of with radius 4 and height 6 will have the same total
volume as a cylinder with the same radius and height?

   Solution
The SAT will frequently test your proficiency in manipulating algebraic
expressions instead of doing long calculations. This question is a great
example of this. Rather than calculating the volume of each cone, look at


the relationship between the two formulas:

The cylinder volume is three times that of the cone volume, since
everything in the two formulas is the same except for the in front of the
cone volume formula. Since goes into 1 three times, three cones could fit
into a cylinder with the same radius and height as the cone.

Volume of a Pyramid




  Example
Consider a pyramid with a volume of 20 cubic inches. If the width is cut in
half and the height is doubled, what would be the volume of the resulting
pyramid?

  Solution

Focus on how the changes to the width and height would affect the volume
calculation.
For the original pyramid, the volume calculation would be as follows:




For the second pyramid, the new width is w and the new height is 2h. So,
the volume would be:
Therefore, the volume of the new pyramid will be identical to the volume of
the first: 20 cubic inches.

Practice
What is the volume of a box with dimensions 3 inches by 2 inches by 5
  ches?
What is the volume of a cone with a radius and height both of y centimeters?
What is the volume of a sphere with a diameter of 6 inches?
 ow many pyramids with dimensions 1 by 1 by 1 inch would fit in a box with
  mensions 1 inch by 2 inches by 2 inches?
  the height of a cylinder were tripled and its radius halved, what would the
 olume of the new cylinder be as a multiple of the volume of the original?

  Solutions

wh = 3 × 2 × 5 = 30 cubic inches

 e sure to use the radius and not the diameter—the radius for this sphere is 3
 ches. Plug 3 in to the sphere volume formula:



 ivide the volume of a 1 by 2 by 2 inch pyramid by that of a 1 by 1 by 1 inch
 yramid to see how many of the smaller pyramids would fit within the larger
 ne.




 o, four of the smaller pyramids would fit in the larger pyramid.
  se the formula for Cylinder Volume = π r2 h. For the original cylinder, let’s
  st use r as the radius and h as the height, making the volume π r2 h. For the
 ew cylinder, the height is tripled and the radius is halved. So, use 3h for the
 eight and r for the radius and calculate the new volume:



 o, the volume of the new cylinder would be      the volume of the original one.
 Practice Drill—Area, Perimeter, and Volume
 (If timing, take about 12 minutes to complete.)

 Fill-In Practice: Write your answer in the underlined blank under each
 question.




AEDC is a parallelogram, with the length of AB 6 units, the length of BC 10
units, and the length of AE 10 units. Point B is on AC and BE is
perpendicular to AC. What is the area of the parallelogram in square units?


 Answer:__________


A rectangular plot of land has a length twice its width. If the perimeter of the
and is 90 feet, what is its area in square feet?


 Answer:__________


If a cube has a volume of 125 cubic centimeters, what is the combined length
of all the edges of the cube in centimeters?


 Answer:__________
A cylinder has a volume of 150π square units and a height of 6 units. What is
he diameter of the base of the cylinder in units?


 Answer:__________




What is the area in square units of the trapezoid above, in which AB and CD
are parallel?


 Answer:__________

 Multiple-Choice Practice

ach gallon of wall paint that Julius purchases covers 400 square feet. If Julius
  going to paint 3 walls, each with dimensions 40 feet by 12 feet, what is the
 inimum number of gallons of paint he needs to purchase, assuming he can
nly buy whole gallons and that there are no windows or other irregularities on
 e walls?

A) 2
B) 3
C) 4
D) 5

basket maker designs cylindrical baskets with a radius of x centimeters, for
hich the height of the basket is twice the radius of the basket. Which of the
ollowing would correctly express the volume, V, in cubic centimeters, of such
askets?

A) V = 2π x3
B) V = π x2
C) V = 4π x2
D) V = 4π x3




n the three-dimensional figure above, a rectangular prism with dimensions 12
 et by 10 feet by 15 feet has a pyramid with a base of 10 by 15 feet on top of
  The height of the rectangular prism and pyramid together is 20 feet. What is
 e volume of this entire figure?

A) 900 cubic feet
B) 1,460 cubic feet
C) 2,200 cubic feet
D) 3,000 cubic feet
  shoebox in the shape of a rectangular prism is supposed to have a volume
etween 432 and 504 cubic inches, inclusive. The box needs to have a length
f 12 inches and a width of 6 inches. What is the range for a possible value for
 e height of the box?

A) 5–6 inches inclusive
B) 6–7 inches inclusive
C) 7–8 inches inclusive
D) 8–9 inches inclusive

 cylindrical tank is 3 meters deep and has a diameter of 10 meters. If the
ensity of water is       , how would one correctly calculate the mass in
lograms of the water in the tank if it is filled to the top with nothing but
ater?

A) π × (102) × 3 × 997
B) π × (102) × (1.5) × 997
C) π × (52) × (1.5) × 997
D) π × (52) × 3 × 997


 Solutions
 1. (128) BE is the height of the parallelogram, so use the Pythagorean



     theorem to solve for its length:

     Then, multiply the height 8 by the base of 16 (add AB and BC) to find
     the area of the parallelogram:

 2. (450) Let’s call x the length of the rectangle and y the width of the
    rectangle. Since the length is twice that of the width, we can say that x =
    2y. The perimeter of the rectangle is 2x + 2y, and since x = 2y, we can
    use substitution to solve for either the width or length—let’s solve for




    the width:

   So, the width of the rectangle is 15, and the length would be twice 15:
   30. Then multiply 30 and 15 together to find the area of the rectangle:


3. (60) The volume, V, of a cube of side length x is V = x3. Solve for x



    given that the volume is 125 cubic centimeters:

   There are 12 total edges in a cube, so multiply 5 by 12 to find the
   combined length of all the edges of the cube:



4. (10) Plug the volume and the height into the cylinder volume formula:




   Now, double the radius to solve for the base diameter:



5. (44) First, determine the height of the trapezoid. The trapezoid is
   isosceles which makes it easier to find the height using the Pythagorean
   theorem, since 32 + 42 = 52.
   Now, use the area formula for a trapezoid to solve:




6. (C) Find the surface area of each individual wall:



   Then multiply 480 by 3 to get the total area of the three walls:



   Now, divide 1,440 by 400 to see how many gallons of paint would be
   needed:




   Since Julius cannot purchase a partial gallon of paint, he must buy 4 full
   gallons to accomplish his task.

7. (A) Since the height of the basket is twice the radius of the basket, the
   height will be 2x. Plug x in for the radius and 2x in for the height to


    express the volume:
8. (C) The figure is a box with dimensions 12 by 10 by 15 with a pyramid
   on top of it. The pyramid has a base of 10 by 15 and a height of 8, since
   20 − 12 = 8. Find the volumes of these two figures and add them
   together. First, the volume of the box:

   Next, the volume of the pyramid:




   Finally, add these separate volumes together to find the total volume:



9. (B) Pick a value that is within the range of 432 and 504 and solve for
   the possible height. Halfway between 432 and 504 is 468, so we can use
   that as a sample volume. The length and width are given, so let’s plug
   in 468 for the volume and solve for the potential height:




   The only option that has 6.5 as a possibility for the height is choice (B).

10. (D) Multiply the density by the volume of the tank so we can find the
    mass of water in the tank—when doing this, we are left with kilograms
    as the resulting unit. Use 5 meters as the radius, since radius is half the

    diameter:

Lines, Angles, and Triangles


                                 SAT Math Strategy
  Unless the question states otherwise, the drawings on the SAT math will all be done to scale,
  so do not hesitate to estimate based on the drawings. The angle rules below are very helpful to
  know, but if you forget them on test day, making estimates is an excellent backup plan.



Supplementary Angles

Supplementary angles add up to 180 degrees. The most common example
of supplementary angles is when two angles are formed with a straight line
across the bottom.




The sum of x and y is 180 degrees.

   Example




Given that ABC is a straight line that is intersected at point B by BD, and
that ∠ABD is 120°, what is the measure of ∠DBC?

   Solution
The two angles add up to 180°, so subtract to find the answer, using x as the

unknown angle measure:

So, ∠DBC = 60°
Vertical Angles

When two lines intersect, the angles that are across from one another are
called vertical angles. Vertical angles are equal to one another.




   Example




Two lines intersect one another in the figure above. What is the measure of
∠n?

   Solution

Since ∠n is a vertical angle to the angle of 80° across from it, ∠n will be
equal to this angle and will therefore have a measure of 80°.

Parallel Lines and a Transversal
When two parallel lines are cut by a transversal, a line that intersects both
lines, there are angle equivalencies as labelled below:




It can help to remember that the “big” angles (in this case x) are all
equivalent and the “small” angles (in this case y) are all equivalent.

   Example

Two parallel lines have a transversal running through them, as indicated in
the drawing below. What is the measure of ∠a?




   Solution

The measures of all the angles are labelled below:




As you can see, the “big” angles are all equivalent and the “small” angles
are all equivalent. To calculate the value of a, subtract 70° from 180° since
a and 70° are supplementary:
  So, a is equal to 110°.

  Practice

 ∠x is supplementary to an angle of 40 degrees, what is the measure of ∠x?




wo lines intersect above, forming angles with measures a, b, and c degrees. If
b is twice the measure of ∠a, what is the measure of ∠c?




wo parallel lines are intersected by a transversal, as given above. What are
e measures of the labelled angles?

  Solutions

 40) Since ∠x is supplementary to 40°, ∠x is equal to 180° minus 40°.



 20) ∠b and ∠a are supplementary, so they will add up to 180°. Since ∠b is
wice the measure of ∠a, b = 2a. Now, plug 2a in for b to solve for the angle



 easure of a:

ince ∠b and ∠a are supplementary, find the value of ∠b by subtracting 60
om 180: 180 − 60 = 120. ∠b is 120°, and since ∠c and ∠b are vertical
ngles, ∠c is also equal to 120°.
 a is supplementary to 45°, so it has a measure of 180 − 45 = 135. ∠b, ∠e,
nd ∠f are all equal to 45°, given that these are parallel lines with a
ansversal. ∠a, ∠c, ∠d, and ∠g are all equal to 135°. This is an excellent
xample of a problem in which you can think it through using the facts that the
big” angles are equal and the “small” angles are equal.

 Angles, Triangles, and Quadrilaterals
 The SAT gives you this important information on the formula sheet at the
 beginning:

     The sum of the measures in degrees of the angles of a triangle is 180.

 Even though this is given, it is extremely helpful to commit this
 fundamental concept to memory.

    Example




 In the triangle above, what is the measure of ∠x?

    Solution
 Subtract 70 and 40 from 180 to find the measure of ∠x:



 So, ∠x is 70°.
The SAT does NOT give you reminders of these concepts—be sure you
memorize them.
 Equilateral triangles have all three angles equal (each measuring 60
 degrees) and all three sides equal.
 Isosceles triangles have only two angles equal and two sides equal.




   Example

Is an equilateral triangle also isosceles?

   Solution

Yes—it is a special form of an isosceles triangle. If two of the angles and
corresponding sides are equivalent, the triangle is isosceles. An equilateral
triangle does have two angles and sides equivalent. This situation is similar
to saying that a square is a special form of a rectangle.
    Similar triangles are ones with the same angles, but not necessarily the
same sides.
The triangle on the right is larger than the one on the left, yet they are
similar—they have the same angle measures and their sides are
proportional to each other.

   Example




Suppose that the two triangles above are similar to one another. What is the
length of side x?

   Solution
Since the triangles are similar, their corresponding sides are proportional:




So, set up a proportion to solve for x:




x is therefore 20 units long. You could also have used a different proportion
to solve this given the numbers provided.
     A final important fact to know about angles is that a quadrilateral has
internal angles that add up to 360 degrees. This is true for squares,
rectangles, parallelograms, trapezoids, and so on.
     Example
  In the parallelogram below, what is the measure of ∠x?




     Solution

  Subtract the other angles from 360° to find the measure of ∠x:



  ∠x is equal to the angle opposite it, 60°.

  Practice

 three of the angles in a trapezoid add up to 300°, what is the measure of the
ourth angle?
 an isosceles triangle has one angle of 100°, what are the measures of the
 her two angles?
 triangle has two sides with a length of 7 units and two angles that each
 easure 60°. Based on this information, what is the length of the third side of
 e triangle?




 ased on the drawing of the two triangles above, what is the measure of side
?
  Solutions

60°) Since a trapezoid is a quadrilateral, its internal angles will add up to
60°. To find the measure of the fourth angle, subtract 300 from 360:


o, the fourth angle has a measure of 60°.
40°) A triangle has a total internal degree measure of 180°. Since one of the
ngles is 100°, it must be the case that the other two angles are equivalent and
 ould add up to 80°. (If the 100° angle were duplicated, the total sum of the
 ternal angles in the isosceles triangle would exceed 200°, which is not
ossible.) So, subtract 100 from 180 to find the sum of the other two angles:


hen, divide 80 by 2 to find the measure of each of the other two angles:



o, each of the other two angles will measure 40°.
7) Since two of the angles in the triangle are each 60°, the measure of the
 ird angle must also be 60° so that the three angles can have a sum of 180°.
ince all the angles are equivalent, the triangle must be equilateral. By
efinition, an equilateral triangle will have equal angles and equal sides.
 herefore, the measure of the third side of the triangle will be equivalent to the
 easures of the other two sides—7 units.
 2) The two triangles are both isosceles with angle measures of 50°, 50°, and
00°. Since they are similar to one another, the side lengths will be
roportional.
 s you can see from the drawings above, the measure of side x will therefore
e 12.

 Practice Drill—Lines, Angles, and Triangles
 (If timing, take about 12 minutes to complete.)

 Fill-In Practice: Write your answer in the underlined blank under each
 question.




In the drawing above of the two intersecting lines, how many of the angles x,
y, and z is/are equal to 120°?


 Answer:__________


An equilateral triangle has sides of the following lengths in units: 8, x − 7,
and − 2x + 38. What is the value in units of x?


 Answer:__________
For parallel lines l and m with an intersecting line n, what is the measure of
angle x in degrees?


 Answer: ________




Given that l is a straight line, what is the mean of the measures of angles x, y,
and z in degrees?


 Answer: ________




In ΔADE, B is a point on AD and C is a point on AE, and BC and DE are
parallel. If AE is 12 units, AC is 4 units, and BC is 3 units, what is the
measure of DE in units?


 Answer: ________

Multiple-Choice Practice
If lines l and m are parallel, and line n intersects both line l and line m, which
pairs of angles must be congruent?

  I. ∠a and ∠h
 II. ∠c and ∠f
III. ∠e and ∠b

(A) I only
(B) III only
(C) I and II only
(D) All of the above


If triangle ABC has one angle greater than 90°, what is the maximum number
of sides of the triangle that can be equal in length?

(A) 1
(B) 2
(C) 3
(D) Cannot be determined with the given information
 In the above figure, lines l and m are parallel, and lines a and b intersect at
 point C. If ∠CDE is 80° and ∠ACF is 30°, what is the measure of ∠x?

 (A) 70°
 (B) 80°
 (C) 100°
 (D) 150°




n parallelogram ABCD above, AB, BC, CD, DA, and AC are all congruent.
What is the measure of angle ∠BAC?

A) 60°
B) 80°
C) 90°
D) 120°
n the graph above, lines l and m are parallel, AB and BC are congruent,
 DBE is 50°, and lines j and k intersect at point B. What is the measure of
ngle x?

A) 60°
B) 80°
C) 100°
D) 120°


  Solutions
   1. (1) Only the vertical angle that is across from the angle of 120° will
       also have a measure of 120°. ∠x and the angle across from it each
       measure 60°.

   2. (15) All of the sides in an equilateral triangle are equivalent, so set up


         an equation to solve for x:

   3. (140) ∠x is identical to the angle that is supplementary to 40°.
       Therefore,
4. (60) All three of the angles add up to 180°, so calculate the mean by
    dividing 180 by 3:




5. (9) Triangles ABC and ADE are similar to one another because their
    angles are congruent, so their sides are proportional. Set up a
    proportion to solve for DE.




6. (C) With parallel lines and a transversal, match up the “large” and the
    “small” angles to establish equivalences. ∠a and ∠h are alternate
    exterior angles that are congruent, and ∠c and ∠fare alternate
    interior angles that are congruent. ∠e and ∠b are not congruent,
    which you see from estimation in addition to knowing the general
    rule.

7. (B) It will be impossible for the triangle to have all sides equal, since
    an equilateral triangle has all angles equal to 60°. However, it is
    possible to have two of the sides equal since an isosceles triangle
    could be formed. For example, if the largest angle were 100° and the
    other two angles were both 40°, the sides opposite the 40° angles
    would be equivalent.

8. (A) Since lines l and m are parallel with a transversal, ∠CED will
    equal 30°. ∠x, ∠CED, and ∠CDE add up to 180° because they are
    within a triangle. Therefore, you can solve for ∠x as follows:
 9. (A) If all the sides are equivalent, two equilateral triangles, ABC and
     ACD, will form. Since all the angles in an equilateral triangle are
     equal to 60°, ∠BAC will equal 60°.

 10. (B) Use the fact that vertical angles are equal and the angles across
      from equal sides in an isosceles triangle (i.e., ABC) are equal to
      establish equivalences as drawn below:




Since AB and BC are congruent, ∠BAC = ∠BCA (triangle ABC is
isosceles). Since lines l and m are parallel and ∠KBE and ∠BAC are
corresponding angles, ∠BAC = 50°. Therefore, ∠BCA = 50° and ∠x =
180° − 50° − 50° = 80°.

Right Triangles and Trigonometry
Pythagorean Theorem and Special Right Triangles
The SAT provides you with these two important right triangle formulas that
enable you to determine the side lengths and even some angles in right




triangles (triangles that have a 90° angle):
Even though they are provided, it is extremely helpful to have these
formulas memorized so that you can more instantaneously and intuitively
determine right angle relationships.

   Example 1




What is the length of x in the right triangle above?

   Solution

Use the Pythagorean theorem to solve. Sides a and b are both “legs” of the
right triangle (the sides NOT across from the 90° angle), and side c is the
hypotenuse (the side that is across from the 90° angle). Let’s use 8 as side a,
15 as side b, and x as side c.
So, side x is equal to 17 units.

   Example 2




What is the length of side x in the right triangle above?

   Solution

While you could use the Pythagorean theorem to solve for x, it will be more
efficient to recognize that this is a special right triangle in which the sides
have a relationship of s, s, s . The legs of the triangle are both 8, so you
can find the hypotenuse of the triangle by multiplying 8 by . Therefore,
the length of x is 8 .

   Example 3




What is the length of side a in the right triangle above?

   Solution
The above triangle has angles of 90°, 30°, and 60° (since 180 − 30 − 90 =
60). So, the sides will have a relationship of x, x , and 2x. So, instead of
having to use the Pythagorean theorem to solve for a, realize that a will
simply be multiplied by 3, given where the sides are in the triangle.
Therefore, a = 3 .
    Another way of solving for the unknown sides of right triangles is to use
Pythagorean triples. These are combinations of side lengths in right
triangles for which each value is an integer. The most important ones to
know are the following:
Not only will the above combinations work as sides for right triangles, but
multiples of them will also work. Just as 5-12-13 could be sides of a right
triangle, 10-24-26 could also be sides of a right triangle, since each side is
twice the value of the sides in the original triple.

   Example
What is the measure of side x in the triangle below?




   Solution
While you could solve for x by using the Pythagorean theorem, you can
solve this more quickly by recognizing that the sides in this triangle are
multiples of a 3-4-5 triple. The 6 is twice 3, the 8 is twice 4, so the x is
twice 5. So, to solve for x, just double 5:
Side x therefore has a length of 10 units.

Practice
  two legs in a right triangle are 9 and 40, what is the length of the
 ypotenuse?
  the hypotenuse in a right triangle is 61 and one of the legs is 60, what is the
 ngth of the other leg?
 wo legs in a right triangle are equal to y. What is the value of the hypotenuse
  terms of y?
  the hypotenuse in a right triangle is equal to 50 and the smaller leg is equal
  14, what is the length of the third side?
  the sides in a right triangle are 4, 4 , and 8, what is the measure of the
 mallest angle in the triangle?

  Solutions

 se the Pythagorean theorem to solve:




 o, the hypotenuse has a length of 41 units.
  se the Pythagorean theorem to solve for the unknown leg. Use 61 as the c
 nd 60 as a:




 o, the unknown side has a length of 11 units.
With two of the legs equal in this triangle, we know that the relationship of the
 des is s, s, s . Plugging in y for s, the hypotenuse will be y .

While you could use the Pythagorean theorem to solve this, you will save time
 you recognize that these values are twice what we would find in the
ythagorean triple of 7-24-25. So, double the 24 to find the third side: 24 × 2 =
8.

ince the sides have the ratios x, x , and 2x (with x = 4), the triangle will
ave angles of 30°, 60°, and 90°. The smallest angle will therefore have a
 easure of 30°.

 Sine, Cosine, Tangent
 In a right triangle (a triangle with a 90° angle), the three sides are called the
 following:

 Hypotenuse: This side is across from the 90° angle, and is always the
 longest side of the triangle.

 Opposite: The side that is opposite, or across from, a particular angle. It
 could be either of the legs of the triangle depending on where the angle is.

 Adjacent: The side that is adjacent to, or next to, a particular angle. It also
 could be either of the legs of the triangle depending on where the angle is
 and will never be the hypotenuse.

    For example, in the right triangle below, the hypotenuse and the sides
 opposite and adjacent to angle x are labelled:




 The popular acronym SOH-CAH-TOA will help you remember which sides
 to use when calculating sine, cosine, and tangent.
Let’s take a look at an example to see what the different trigonometry
values would be.




   Example
What is the tangent for angle x in the right triangle below?




   Solution

To find the tangent, we need the opposite side and the adjacent side. The
side of length 4 is opposite ∠x, and the side of length 3 is adjacent to ∠x.


So, calculate the tangent of ∠x as follows:

Practice
  Consider the triangle below:




What is sin x?
What is cos y?
What is tan y?
n a 45-45-90 triangle, which values will be identical?
 I. cos 45
 I. sin 45
 I. tan 45

  Solutions




n a 45-45-90 triangle, the sides have a ratio of s:s:s . I and II are equal since
os (45) and sin (45) are both . III is not equal to the others since tan (45) is
 st 1.

  Area of an Equilateral Triangle
  While it is manageable to solve for the area of an equilateral triangle
  without knowing this formula, memorizing it will save you time should you
  come across a problem that asks about it.
     The area, A, of an equilateral triangle with sides of length a is:
   Example
What is the area of an equilateral triangle with sides that are 4 inches long?

   Solution
Plug 4 in for a into the equilateral triangle area formula:




So, the area of the triangle would be 4    square inches.

Sine and Cosine of Complementary Angles

Complementary angles add up to 90°. The relationship of the sine and
cosine of complementary angles is:



   Example
If the sine of 30° is 0.5, what is the cosine of 60°?

   Solution

While you could use a calculator for a problem like this on the calculator-
permitted test section, if this were on the non-calculator test section you
would have to know an alternative way to approach it. Use the relationship
between the sine and cosine of complementary angles to solve. Since 30 +
60 = 90, 30° and 60° are complementary. Because sin (x) = cos (90° − x),
sin (30) = cos (60), and the cosine of 60° will also equal 0.5.

Practice Drill—Right Triangles and Trigonometry
 (If timing, take about 12 minutes to complete.)




riangle ABC is portrayed above. If triangle DEF is similar to triangle ABC,
nd angle B corresponds to angle E, what is the measure of angle E?

A) 28°
B) 52°
C) 62°
D) 84°




n ΔABC, ∠A is 90° and ∠B is 45°. If BC has a length of 4 units, what is the
 ngth of AC?

A) 2
B) 2
C) 2
D) 4
rectangle ABCD has a side length of 7 for AC and a side length of 24 for
D, what is the length of the diagonal AD?

A) 14
B) 25
C) 28
D) 35

or an equilateral triangle with a side length of 8 units, what is the triangle’s
ea in square units?

A) 8
B) 8
C) 16
D) 16

riangle DEF is similar to triangle ABC, with vertex D corresponding to
ertex A, vertex E corresponding to vertex B, and vertex F corresponding to
ertex C. The measure of ∠C is 90° and the measure of ∠B is 30°. What is
 e cosine of ∠D?

A)
B)
C)
D)
What is the difference between sin(x) and cos(90° − x) if x is an angle between
 0 and 30 degrees?

A) 0
B)
C)
D)
 What is the sine of the smallest angle in a right triangle with sides 7, 24, and
 25?

 (A)
   Image
 (B)
   Image
 (C)
   Image
 (D)
   Image

         Images

n rectangle ABCD above, diagonal DB is 10 units long, and side BC is 6 units
 ng. What is the area of the rectangle ABCD?

A) 30 square units
B) 36 square units
C) 48 square units
D) 60 square units

       Images

 ight triangles ABC and DEF are similar to each other. What is the tangent of
  EDF?

A)
 Image
B)
 Image
C)
 Image
D) 2

       Images

n the figure above, XZ and WY are perpendicular, and WY bisects XZ. XY and
Y are of equal length, WX and WZ are of equal length, and ∠XWY = 45°. If
 Y is 4 and WX is 2 , what is the length of WY?

A) 2
B) 2
C) 4
D) 2 + 2

 Solutions

   1. (C) Calculate ∠B as follows:

                                      Images

        Since ∠B and ∠E correspond to one another, ∠E will have the same
        measure of 62°.

   2. (B) In a 45-45-90 triangle, the hypotenuse is multiplied by the
       length of one of the legs. So, in this situation, solve for the length of
       one of the legs by using a proportion:Images

   3. (B) Use the Pythagorean theorem to solve for the length of the
       diagonal:

                                      Images

        Alternatively, you could recognize that this is a Pythagorean triple of
        7-24-25, thereby avoiding the need to calculate.

   4. (D) Plug 8 in for a into the area formula for an equilateral triangle:
                                   Images

5. (B) ∠D will have a measure of 60°, since it corresponds to ∠A in the
    other triangle. Calculate the cosine of ∠D using your calculator (be
    sure your calculator is set to calculate in degrees, not radians), or
    realize that this is a 30-60-90 triangle so the side adjacent to 60° will
    be like 1 and the hypotenuse will be like 2. Since the cosine equals
    the adjacent divided by the hypotenuse, its value will Image
                                                             be .

6. (A) Given that sin (x) = cos (90° − x), the two expressions will be
    equal to one another.

    Therefore, the value when the cos (90° − x) is subtracted from sin(x)
    will be zero, regardless of what particular value you would select for
    x.

7. (A) The smallest angle is marked below—it is the one across from the
    smallest side, 7.

                                   Images

    The sine of this angle is equal to the opposite side divided by the
    hypotenuse: Image.

8. (C) Solve for the length of the rectangle so that you can then multiply
    by the width of 6 to find the rectangle’s area. Save time by
    recognizing that the numbers 10 and 6 are double the values found in
    the 3-4-5 Pythagorean triple. So, the length will be twice 4: 8. Then,
    multiply 8 by 6 to find the area of the rectangle: 8 × 6 = 48.

9. (A) Because the triangles are similar to one another, their
    corresponding sides will be proportional. The tangent of ∠EDF will
    be the same as the tangent of ∠BAC. Recognize that triangle ABC is
    a special right triangle: 30-60-90 with sides relating to each other as
    x, x , and 2x. Therefore, the unknown side in the triangle ABC will
      be 5. You can then calculate the tangent of ∠BAC by dividing the
      oppposite side of 5 by the adjacent side of 5 Images
                                                     :

 10. (D) Label the figure below to find the angle and side values based on
     the 30-60-90 triangles and 45-45-90 triangles within:
                                                        Images

   The length of WY is therefore 2 + 2    .

Circles

At the beginning of each math test section, you are provided with these
facts and formulas about circles:

                                   Images

 r = Radius of the Circle
 Area of a Circle = πr2
 Circumference of a Circle = 2πr
 A circle has 360 degrees.

Memorize these facts so you do not have to flip back to the beginning of the
section. Here is how to apply these essential concepts.

Radius and Diameter
  The radius goes the distance from the center of the circle to the circle
 itself, and is half the length of the diameter.
  The diameter goes from one side of a circle to another side through the
 center, and is twice the measure of the radius.

                                   Images

  Example

What is the radius and the diameter in the circle drawn below?

                                   Images
   Solution

The diameter is 10 and the radius will be half the diameter, so the radius is
5.

Area and Circumference
The area of a circle is calculated using the radius, r:

                                     Images

The circumference of a circle is calculated using the radius, r:

                                     Images

Keep these two concepts clear by remembering that the area will give you
square units, while the circumference will give you units of length.

Note: It is fine to use the formula Circumference = π × Diameter if you
would prefer.

   Example

What is the area and the circumference of a circle with a radius of 5 inches?

   Solution

Calculate each value using the above formulas, plugging 5 in for r.

                                     Images

360° in a Circle

                                     Images

A full rotation of a circle will be 360°.
   Example

A circle can be divided into how many right angles?

   Solution

Since there are a total of 360° in a circle, and a right angle is 90°, a circle
can be divided into Image 4 right angles.

Inscribed Angle

This is a less common concept related to degree measure that is good to
understand, just in case a problem about it comes up.

                                     Images

In the graph above, 2x corresponds to a central angle and x corresponds to
an inscribed angle. When the inscribed angle and the central angle have the
same arc, the central angle is twice the measure of the inscribed angle.

   Example
In the circle graphed below with a central angle of 80°, what is the measure
of ∠x?

                                     Images

   Solution
Given that ∠x is an inscribed angle that shares the same arc as the central
angle of 80°, ∠x will be half the measure of 80°:

                                     Images

Practice
   the radius of a circle is x units, what will be the diameter of the circle in
  rms of x?
What is the area of a circle with a radius of 10 inches?
What is the circumference of a circle with a diameter of 4 inches?
   a circular pie is to be divided into 12 equal pieces, what will be the measure
 f the angle formed at the central tip of each piece of pie after the pieces are
ut?
What is the measure of the central angle a of the sector drawn in the figure
 elow?

                                      Images

  Solutions

 he diameter of a circle is twice that of the radius, so the diameter will be 2x.
 rea = π r2 → π 102 = 100π
 e sure you use 2 for the radius, not 4. Circumference = 2πr → 2 × π × 2 = 4π
 ake 360° and divide it by 12 to find the angle:

                                      Images

 he central angle will be twice the measure of the inscribed angle, 35°. So 35°
 2 = 70°.
 he SAT will have you apply the general concepts about circle area,
  rcumference, and degree measure to calculate the length of an arc or the area
 f a sector.

  Arc Length

                                       Images

      Example
  In a circle of radius 3 with an arc of 60°, what is the length of the arc?
                                      Images

   Solution

                                      Images

So, set up a proportion to solve for the arc length:

                                      Images

The length of the arc is therefore π units.

Sector Area

                                      Images

   Example
In a circle with a radius of 3 and a sector of 60°, what is the area of the
sector?

                                      Images

   Solution

                                      Images

So, set up a proportion to solve for the sector area:

                                      Images

The area of the sector is therefore   Image π square units.

Practice
What is the length of a 45° arc in a circle that has a radius of 5 inches?
What is the area of a 30° arc in a circle with a radius of 4 inches?
   circular pizza has a surface area of 64π square inches. If the pizza is divided
  to 8 equal pieces made by cutting along the diameter through the center
 oint of the pizza, what is the length of the crust on the edge of each piece?

  Solutions

  1.

                                        Images

          So, set up a proportion to solve for the arc length:

                                        Images

  2.

                                        Images

          So, set up a proportion to solve for the sector area:

                                        Images

   3. First, solve for the radius of the pizza by using its area:

                                          Images

       Next, find the angle for the sector formed by each of the 8 pieces:

                                          Images

       Then, calculate the length of a sector in a circle with a radius of 8 inches
       and a sector angle of 45°:

                                          Images
     So, set up a proportion to solve for the arc length:

                                         Images

     So, the length of the crust on each piece would be approximately 6.3
     inches.

  Circle Formula
  To graph a circle in the xy-coordinate plane, use this formula:

                                       Images

      Example
  What is the graph of a circle with the equation (x − 3)2 + (y − 2)2 = 16?

      Solution
  Based on the equation, the center of the circle will be (3, 2), and the radius
  will be the square root of 16, which is 4. Here is the graph of this circle:
   Images

  Practice

What is the radius of a circle with the equation (x − 2)2 + (y + 5)2 = 81?
What is the center of a circle with the equation (x + 5)2 + (y − 6)2 = 14?
What is the equation of the circle graphed below?

                                      Images

  Solutions

 ake the square root of 81 to find the radius:

                                      Images
 e careful with the negative signs, keeping in mind that in the original circle
ormula, there are negative signs in front of the h and k. So, +5 will give an x-
oordinate for the center of −5 and −6 will give a y-coordinate for the center of
6. Therefore, the center point (h, k) will be (− 5, 6).
 he center of the circle is at (1, − 2) and the radius is 3 units. So, the equation
or the circle will be (x − 1)2 + (y + 2)2 = 9.

  Radians

  A radian is a different way of measuring angles. The SAT says the
  following at the beginning of the test section:
    There are 2π radians in a circle.

  Since there are 360° in a circle, 360° corresponds to 2π radians. Divide this
  by 2 to find:

                                       Images

  While you could figure out radian to degree conversion based just on what
  the SAT provides at the beginning of the section, it might be easier for you
  to memorize this conversion formula: Images

     Example

  How many radians are in 90 degrees?

     Solution

                                       Images

  So, there are   Image radians in 90°.

  In addition to doing this conversion, you can memorize several common
  unit circle points and radian to degree conversions as given in the graph of
  the unit circle below.
Common Unit Circle Points and Degree to Radian Conversions:

                                     Images

Practice

ow many radians are in 270°?
ow many degrees are in π radians?
ow many total radians would there be in two circles?

Solutions
1.
                                     Images

                                     Images


     You could also use the graph of the circle with the radian to degree
     conversions.
2.
                                     Images

                                     Images


     You could also memorize that 180° are in π radians.


3. A single circle has 2π radians, so two circles will have twice this: 4π
   radians.

Practice Drill—Circles
(If timing, take about 12 minutes to complete.)
 a circle has an area of 64π units, how many units long is its circumference?

A) 8π
B) 12π
C) 16π
D) 32π

onsider the circle defined by the equation (x + 4)2 + (y − 8)2 = 144. What is
e radius of this circle?

A) 4
B) 8
C) 12
D) 72

 Images

he above circle has points A and C and a center of B. What percentage of the
rcle’s area is within the sector designated by the central angle ∠ABC?

A) 8%
B) 12.5%
C) 14.5%
D) 25%

  square with a perimeter of 16 inches is inscribed within a circle, all of the
quare’s vertices intersecting the circle itself. What is the diameter of the
 rcle?

A) 4
B)
C)
D) 8
 ircle A has a radius of 2 units and an area of x square units. If circle B has a
  dius twice that of circle A, and the area of circle B is expressed in the form
 x, in which n is a constant, what is the value of n?

A) 1
B) 2
C) 3
D) 4

 circle has a diameter of 10 units. The function graphed below could
 present what about the circle?

                                      Images

A) The distance y from a point x on the circle to its center.
B) The area of the circle, y, depending on its radius, x.
C) The circumference of the circle, y, depending on its diameter, x.
D) The diameter of the circle measured at different points in the coordinate
   plane, (x, y).

What is the radius of the circle with the equation x2 − 4x + y2 + 2y = 11?

A) 3
B) 4
C) 6
D) 7

  Images

 he circle above is centered at the origin with a radius of 1 unit; AB and BC
 e both radii of the circle. In triangle ABC above, ∠BAC is 40°. What is the
 easure of ∠ACB in radians?

A)
B)
C) π
D)

t what point will a circle with the equation (x − 4)2 + (y − 5)2 = 9 and the line
= − 2 intersect?

A) (−5, −2)
B) (3, − 2)
C) (4, 5)
D) They will not intersect.

 Images

 the cosine of ∠ABC in the unit circle above is − , what is the tangent of
 ABC?

A) −1
B) −0.5
C) 1
D) 1.8

 Solutions

     1. (C) Use the formula for area to find the radius of the circle:

                                       Images

         Now, use the formula for circumference, using 8 as the radius:

                                       Images

     2. (C) In the circle formula, the right side is the radius squared. So, find
         the square root of 144 to find the radius:
3. (B) There are 360° in a circle, so find the percentage that 45° is out of
    360°:

                                  Images

4. (B) If the square has a perimeter of 16 inches, each side on the square
    is 4 inches. The square is inscribed within the circle, making the
    situation look like this:
                          Images

    The triangle formed by two of the sides and the diameter of the circle
    is a 45-45-90 triangle, so the diameter will be units.

5. (D) Circle A will have an area of 4π square units, since it has a radius
    of 2 and the area of a circle is π r2. Circle B has twice the radius of
    circle A, meaning 4 units, thereby having 16π square units of area.
    Comparing the two areas, if x = 4π, and the area of B is 16π, then n
    must equal 4 since .

6. (A) Since the diameter of the circle is 10, the radius is 5. From any
    point on the circle, the distance from the point to the center of the
    circle will be 5. The graph does portray this relationship. It is not
    going to be choice (B) because the area of this circle would be 25π. It
    is not going to be choice (C) because the circumference of the circle
    would be 10π. And it is not going to be choice (D) because the
    diameter is 10, not 5.

7. (B) Complete the square for both the x and y components to get the
    equation into the format of the circle formula, enabling you to see the
    radius:
         Images

    The radius is the square root of 16, 4.

8. (A) Sides AB and BC are equivalent, since they are both radii of the
    circle. Therefore, triangle ABC is isosceles, with ∠BAC and ∠ACB
    both 40°. So, we need to convert 40° to radians using the radian
    conversion formula:Images
   9. (D) The circle has a center at (4, 5) and a radius of 3. So, it has no
       points that will be below the x-axis, and therefore will never intersect
       the line y = −2.

  10. (A) We can label the graph as following given the information in the
      problem, since sides of this ratio will form a 45-45-90 triangle:
                                                                    Images
        The tangent of ∠ABC will therefore be the opposite divided by the
        adjacent, which is . You could also calculate the value by using your
        calculator and solving tan(135) = −1.


 Advanced Drills
 Use these drills to push yourself with the toughest types of problems you
 are likely to encounter on SAT test day. Each drill has ten questions, with
 solutions that follow.
      Algebra Drill 1
      Algebra Drill 2
      Advanced Math Drill 1
      Advanced Math Drill 2
      Problem Solving and Data Analysis
      Geometry and Trigonometry
      Mixed Problems
 If you are doing a drill under timed conditions, allow about 15 minutes to
 complete (longer than the chapter drills because of the increased average
 difficulty of the problems). Good luck!

 Algebra Drill 1

olve for x:

                                    Images
A)
B)
C)
D)

When 2 times a number is subtracted from 14, the result is 2 greater than the
 umber. What is the number in question?

A)
B) 4
C) 12
D) 16

n 2015, Andre had 210 coins in his collection. If Andre adds 5 new coins a
ear starting in 2015 through the end of 2022 and then adds 8 coins a year
 arting in 2023, how many coins will he have in his collection at the end of
045?

A) 224
B) 421
C) 429
D) 434

 ow many pairs (x, y) satisfy both x − y > 3 and y − 5 > x?

A) 0
B) 1
C) 2
D) Infinitely many

What is the solution (x, y) to the following set of equations?

                                      Images
A)
B)
C)
D)

 ow many ordered pairs (x, y) satisfy the following system of equations?

                                     Images

A) 0
B) 1
C) 2
D) Infinitely many

What are the solutions to the following series of equations?

                                     Images

A) a = 0.8 and b = 6
B) a = 16.8 and b = −3
C) No solutions
D) Infinitely many solutions

 andidate M and Candidate N are the only candidates running for city mayor.
  the total number of votes the two candidates receive is 50,000 and if
 andidate M receives 3 times as many votes as Candidate N, what is the total
 umber of votes Candidate N receives?

A) 12,500
B) 16,667
C) 21,500
D) 37,500
ennifer’s yearly salary, S, is modeled using the equation S = 2,500Y + 40,000,
 here Y represents how many years she has been working at the company.
What does the number 2,500 represent in this equation?

A) The amount Jennifer’s salary increases for each year she has been
   working
B) Jennifer’s starting salary
C) The amount of money Jennifer has made in year Y
D) The number of hours Jennifer has worked in year Y

 Avinash reads 2 fiction articles per day and 14 nonfiction articles per week,
 hich expression models the total number of articles he would read in w
 eeks?

A) 2w + 14
B) 16w
C) 28w
D) 112w

  Solutions

A) To make solving this problem a bit easier, let’s convert all of our mixed
umbers into improper fractions:

                                     Images

We eventually want to combine our x terms and combine our constant terms.
 o our x terms need a common denominator (8), and our constant terms need a
 ommon denominator (32). Thus, let’s rewrite our fractions with these
 ommon denominators. Our full equation is now: Images
 o avoid dealing with negatives, let’s bring the constants to the left by adding
  both sides: Images
We then want to get all x terms on the right by subtracting x from both sides:
 Images
o solve for x, divide both sides by (in other words, multiply both sides by ):
 Images
his reduces to , which is choice (A).

B) Let x be the number we are trying to find.
2 times a number is subtracted from 14” can be written as 14 − 2x. (We are
ubtracting 2 times a number, or 2x, from the 14.) “The result is” means an
quals sign.
2 greater than the number” can be written as x + 2. Thus, the whole sentence
an be written as:

                                    Images

dd 2x to both sides to get all x terms on the right. Then subtract 2 from both
des to get all constants on the left:

                                    Images

ividing by 3 tells us that x = 4, which is answer (B).

D) Between 2015 and 2022, Andre adds 5 coins 8 times:

                                    Images

 dding 5 coins 8 times means he added a total of 5(8) = 40 coins in those
ears.
etween 2023 and 2045, he added 8 coins 23 times:

                                    Images

hus, from 2023 to 2045, he added a total of 8(23) = 184 coins.
ndre started with 210 coins. So the sum of the coins in his collection will be
e original 210 plus the number of coins he added:

                                    Images
his is choice (D).

A) Since we have two inequalities, we can use elimination to get rid of one
ariable. Let’s add both equations together:

                                      Images

ubtracting x from both sides and adding 5 to both sides leaves you with 0 > 8.
 ecause we know that under no circumstances is 0 greater than 8, there are no
olutions.

B) In a system of two equations, we can either use substitution or elimination
 solve.
 we multiply the second equation by 12 and add the equations together, our y
rms will cancel out. Start by multiplying the second equation by 12:
Images
ow we can add this equation to the first equation:

                                      Images

o solve for x, divide by −4:

                                      Images

his is enough to narrow down the answer to choice (B). However, you could
ug this x value into one of your functions to solve for y if you wanted.
 lternatively, you could have used substitution by solving for x in the first
quation and then plugging that equation back into the second equation.
o solve for x, first add 3y to both sides:

                                      Images

hen divide both sides by 4 to isolate x:

                                      Images
ow you can plug this expression into the second equation for x:

                                    Images

ext, distribute the

                                    Images

ome of these fractions can be reduced. For our purposes, though, it doesn’t
 ally matter. Next, we need to combine our y terms, but first we need a
ommon denominator.
et’s convert to :

                                    Images

ow combine like terms:

                                    Images

o add to both sides, we need to first convert so that our constants have a
ommon denominator: Images
o solve for y, divide both sides by (multiply both sides by −4):

                                    Images

his is enough to narrow it down to choice (B). However, we can solve for x
y plugging the y value into our equation for x: Images
inally, we could have solved this problem by plugging each answer choice
 to the two equations to see which set of points work. If using this method, be
areful to check that the points satisfy BOTH equations. For instance, choice
C) works when plugged into the first equation but not the second.

B) In the first equation, one of those factors must equal 0 for the whole
quation to equal 0. Therefore, we will find the possible solutions by setting
ach factor equal to 0: Images
dding 2 to both sides tells us that x = 2 is a possible solution:

                                     Images

ubtracting 5 from both sides tells us that y = −5 is another possible solution.
lugging these values into the second equation will tell us the solutions to it:

                                     Images

o 6 + y = 1.
ubtracting 6 from both sides tells us that y = −5, which is the original y value
e got from the first equation.
et’s try the y value that we already determined:

                                     Images

o 3x = 6. Dividing by 3 tells us that x = 2. However, this is the x solution that
e already tried. Therefore, there is only one solution: Images
his is choice (B).

D) Let’s use substitution. Solve for b in the second equation by dividing both
des by −2:

                                     Images

et’s now plug the left side of this equation into the first equation for b:

                                     Images

istributing the leaves us with:

                                     Images

et’s get that into decimal form so that we can easily combine our like terms:

                                     Images
 ombining both a terms results in:

                                     Images

We know that this is always true, meaning we have an infinite number of
olutions.
  lternatively, you may have noticed that if you multiply the second equation
 y ; and convert any fractions in the two equations into decimals, the two
 quations are exactly the same. Since they are the same line, there are
  finitely many solutions.

A) Let’s turn what we know into equations. Let m equal the number of votes
 at Candidate M receives and let n equal the number of votes that Candidate
 receives.
 irst, we know that the sum of the votes that the two candidates receive is
 0,000. In other words:

                                     Images

 dditionally, we know that the number of votes Candidate M receives is 3
 mes the number of votes that Candidate N receives. This can be expressed by
 e equation Images
 ow we can plug in 3n for m in the first equation:

                                     Images

 ombining like terms results in:

                                     Images

We can solve for n by dividing both sides by 4:

                                     Images

 his is choice (A).
A) We’re told that Y is the number of years Jennifer has worked at the
ompany. We can see that each time Y increases by 1, her salary goes up
2,500. For instance, whenY = 0, Jennifer’s salary is $40,000. When Y = 1, her
alary is $42,500. When Y = 2, her salary is $45,000. Therefore, choice (A) is
orrect.
hoice (B) is incorrect because it can be shown that Jennifer’s starting salary
whenY = 0) is $40,000.
hoice (C) is incorrect because the amount of money made is given by the
ariable S.
 hoice (D) is incorrect because the equation tells us nothing about the number
f hours Jennifer worked.

C) We want to know how many articles Avinash reads in w weeks. So we first
eed to figure out how many articles he reads per week. We can then multiply
 is number by w to give the number of articles he reads in w weeks.
vinash reads 2 fiction articles per day. Since there are 7 days in a week, he
 ads 2(7) = 14 fiction articles per week. He also reads 14 nonfiction articles
er week. So Avinash reads 14 + 14 = 28 fiction and nonfiction articles per
 eek.
herefore, the number of articles Avinash reads in w weeks is given by the
xpression 28w, which is choice (C).

  Algebra Drill 2

 −(2x − 4) + 3(x − 5) = −4, what is the value of x?

A) −3
B) 5
C) 7
D) 15

 g(x + 2) = 5x − 4, what is the value of g(7)?
A) 21
B) 29
C) 31
D) 41

ohn is having an undetermined number of people over for dinner. He needs to
ave 6 serving utensils (used by everyone collectively), plus a knife, fork, and
poon for each diner. Which of the following equations correctly models the
 tal number of utensils, U, John will need for x number of diners, himself
 cluded?

A) U = 3x
B) U = 9x
C) U = 3x + 6
D) U = 6x + 3

 f(x) = 4x + 7 and if g(x) = −3x + 2, what is the value of f (g(3))?

A) −27
B) −21
C) −7
D) 19

 nder a new state law, a massage therapist will be required to charge sales tax
n her services. If the sales tax rate is 7%, by what ratio would she need to
 ultiply the current price of her services to determine the new total amount
ustomers will pay under the new law?

A)
B)
C)
D)

 6(2a − b) = 4b, what is the ratio of b to a?
A)
B)
C)
D)

he total operational costs C for a restaurant are modeled by the equation C =
M + 50,000, where M represents the number of meals served. What does the
0,000 represent in the equation?

A) The total operational costs
B) The fixed operational costs
C) The cost per meal
D) The minimum number of meals served

he total costs C to operate a factory are represented by the function C(n) = an
 b, where n is the number of days the factory is operational. If the daily
perations costs were to increase beyond the given rate and if the initial startup
osts were to decrease beyond the given rate, how would this affect the
onstants a and b?

A) a would increase, and b would increase.
B) a would increase, and b would decrease.
C) a would decrease, and b would increase.
D) a and b would remain the same.

 ow will the function f(x) = 4x − 5 be affected by the translation

                                      Images

A) It will be shifted up 2 units and 1 unit to the left.
B) It will be shifted down 1 unit and 2 units to the left.
C) It will be shifted up 2 units and 1 unit to the right.
D) It will be shifted down 1 unit and 2 units to the right.
  company is conducting an online campaign to increase its social media
ollowers. The number of social media followers, N, is estimated by the
quation N = 30W + 250, where W represents the number of weeks of the
ampaign (and W > 0). What does the number 250 represent in the equation?

A) The number of weeks of the campaign
B) The number of new social media followers each week
C) The number of social media followers at the start of the campaign
D) The number of social media followers at the end of W weeks

  Solutions

C) First, we need to distribute. Don’t forget to distribute the negative sign to
 e(2x − 4) term. Distributing gives us:

                                     Images

ombining like terms on the left side gives:

                                     Images

 dding 11 to both sides tells us that x = 7, which is choice (C).
 ote that you could also plug each answer choice into the equation to see
 hich one gives the correct equality, but doing this could be more time-
onsuming.

A) First, we must determine what number we should plug in for x. Our
riginal function is g(x + 2), and we’re looking for g(7). That means that we
 ant x such that x + 2 = 7. Subtracting 2 from both sides gives x = 5. So to
nd g(7), we simply plug in 5 for x in the original function: Images

he correct answer is choice (A).

C) John needs 6 utensils no matter how many people come, so +6 will be a
onstant. He also needs 3 utensils per person, which can be represented as 3x.
hus, he needs 3x + 6 utensils, choice (C).
hoice (A) is incorrect because although it correctly depicts the 3 utensils
eeded for each person, it neglects the 6 serving utensils.
hoice (B) is incorrect because it states that each person needs 9 utensils.
hoice (D) is incorrect because it states that there are 3 utensils needed no
atter how many people come, rather than the 6 utensils actually needed.
 lternatively, you could have imagined a scenario in which John invited 1
 her person over, making a total of 2 people at dinner. They need 6 serving
 ensils, plus each one of them needs a knife, spoon, and fork. This makes a
 tal of 2 knives, 2 spoons, and 2 forks, or 6 more utensils. The total number
f utensils needed in this case is 6 + 6 = 12.
ou could have then plugged in 12 for U, plugged in 2 for x, and chosen the
nswer choice that worked, which is choice (C): Images

B) First, we have to find the value of g(3) by plugging in 3 wherever there’s
n x in g(x):

                                     Images

ow we have to find f (−7) by plugging in −7 wherever there is an x in f(x):

                                     Images

he answer is choice (B).

C) Let’s imagine that a massage therapist currently charges $100 for a
 assage. If the tax rate is 7%, or 0.07, tax on that service will be: Images

herefore, the price of the massage including the sales tax will be:

                                     Images

he ratio of the new price to the old price is:

                                     Images
he massage therapist can find the new prices for all of her services by
ultiplying the old prices by this ratio.

C) First, distribute the 6:

                                      Images

ring the b terms to the right side by adding 6b to both sides:

                                      Images

o find the ratio of b to a, we want to solve for . First, divide both sides by a:
 Images
o isolate , we need to divide both sides by 10:

                                      Images

he correct ratio is choice (C).

B) This $50,000 is some sort of cost that stays the same whether the
 staurant serves 0 meals or serves 1,000 meals. Because the $50,000 doesn’t
ary with the variable meals, it’s a fixed cost, which is choice (B).
hoice (A) is incorrect because C represents the total costs, and C varies with
e number of meals served.
hoice (C) is incorrect because 2 is the cost per meal, as shown by the 2M in
e equation.
hoice (D) is incorrect because the minimum number of meals served could
e any positive integer.

B) Total cost is found by adding together the variable costs and the fixed
osts. In this problem, the variable cost is an since this value depends on n, the
umber of days the factory is operational. Since an is a cost and since n is a
umber of days, it follows that the daily operational cost is given by a.
herefore, if the daily operational cost increases, a will increase.
he initial startup costs, or fixed costs, are given by variable b because b is a
onstant that isn’t affected by the variable n. Therefore, if the startup costs
ecrease, b will decrease.
he correct scenario is depicted in choice (B).

C) In general, if f(x) is our original function and if c is a constant, then:

f (x − c) shifts f(x) to the right by c units.
f (x + c) shifts f(x) to the left by c units.
f(x) + c shifts f(x) up by c units.
f(x) − c shifts f(x) down by c units.
 this particular problem, g(x) = f (x − 1) + 2. Using the above properties, f (x − 1) tells us that f(x) is
ifted to the right by 1 unit. The +2 in the expression tells us that f(x) is shifted up by 2 units. This
rresponds to choice (C).

C) The number 250 is in the equation regardless of the value of W. Therefore,
 makes sense that 250 would be the initial number of followers the campaign
ad. We can see this by plugging 0 in for W in the equation. This gives us the
 itial number of followers before the company starts campaigning: Images

o we can see that when W = 0, N = 250.

  Advanced Math Drill 1

 n element’s half-life is the amount of time that it takes for the element to
ecay by half. If there is x amount of element Z initially, which of the
ollowing represents the amount A of Z that would remain after n whole half-
ves of Z had passed?

A)
B)
C)
D)

s equivalent to which of the following?
A)
B)
C)
D)

  x > 0, then is equivalent to which of the following?

A)
B)
C)
D)

  x2 + ax = b, where a and b are constants, what are the solutions for x?

A)

B)
C)
D)

 x2 + 15xy + 6y2 = ?

A) 3(2x + y)2
B) (3x + y)(x + 3y)
C) (3x + 3y)(2x + 2y)
D) 3(x + 2y)(2x + y)

What are the solution(s) for x in the equation below?

                                     Images

A) 13
B) 13 and −3
C) −3 and 3
D) No solution

 t what points will f(x) = 8x2 − 22x + 15 intersect the x-axis?

A) 15
B)
C)
D)

Which value of n will cause the value of f(x) = xn to be consistently positive
nd increase the most rapidly, given that x is greater than 1 and that n is an
ven integer?

A) −2
B) −1
C) 1
D) 2

 o see if two sets of data are correlated, one can calculate the correlation
 oefficient between two populations, rxy, using the formula , where sxy is the
 ovariance of the population, sx is the standard deviation of population x, and
  is the standard deviation of population y. If the dispersion of population x
 nd the dispersion of population y both increase while the covariance between
  e populations remains the same, what would happen to the correlation
 oefficient of the two populations?

A) It would decrease.
B) It would increase.
C) It would stay the same.
D) It cannot be determined.

 the function f(x) = xn + 3xm has 5 zeros and if f(x) is multiplied by −1, how
 any zeros will the resulting function have?
A) −5
B) 4
C) 5
D) 6

 Solutions
  1. (B) The amount after one half-life is x. After the second half-life,
      half of this new amount decays, and we’re left with:
                                                        Images

        After the third half-life, half of that amount left decays. We now have
        left:

                                     Images

        We can start to see a pattern: each time a half-life passes, we multiply
        the amount we previously had by . So after n half-lives, remains, or
        . This matches choice (B).

  2. (A) . So go ahead and bring a 2 outside of the radical before dealing
      with the variables:
                       Images

        Let’s deal with the x term under the root next. Notice the following:

                                     Images

        Similarly, we can rewrite the y term under the root as follows:

                                     Images

        Thus, the entire expression can be rewritten as:

                                     Images

        This is choice (A).
3. (D) All of the answer choices are a single fraction. So first find a
    common denominator and add the two fractions. The least common
    denominator is 6x. Multiply the first fraction by and the second by :
  Images

    We can rule choice (C) out because it’s our answer squared, so it will
    not equal our answer.
    The rest of the answers are being raised to the power, which is
    equivalent to taking the square root. In order to find out what should
    be inside the parentheses, we must work backward by doing the
    opposite to our function. Because the answer choices take the square
    root of an expression, we must square our expression to find what
    should go inside the parentheses: Images
    Therefore, the answer is choice (D).
    Alternatively, we could have taken the square root of choices (A),
    (B), and (D) to see which one is equivalent to : Images
    So, choice (A) is incorrect.

                                   Images

    So, choice (B) is incorrect.

                                   Images

    This matches the expression we obtained, so choice (D) is correct.

4. (B) In their structure, the answer choices all look like the quadratic
    formula. So subtract b from both sides:
                                          Images

    Now you can use the quadratic formula:

                                   Images
    We have to be careful, though. Our equation has a and b coefficients,
    but they don’t match up exactly with the a and b given in the
    quadratic formula. In the quadratic formula, a is the coefficient in
    front of the x2 term, b corresponds to the coefficient in front of the x
    term, and c represents the constant. In our case, however, the
    coefficient in front of the x2 term is 1, the coefficient of the x term is
    a, and the constant is b. Keep this in mind while using the quadratic
    formula to get: Images
    This doesn’t match any of the answer choices, so we need to simplify
    further. All of the answer choices have the leading term over 2, so
    let’s divide this into two fractions: Images
    From the leading term, you can narrow it down to choices (A), (B),
    and (D). It looks like the answer choices have pulled the denominator
    of the second term into the square root. Because 2 equals , we can
    change the denominator to : Images
    In all of the answer choices, the fraction inside the square root
    appears to be broken up, so do that:

                                  Images

    Reordering what’s inside the root gives you choice (B).

5. (D) One easy way to solve this problem is to use FOIL on the answer
    choices and see which matches the original: Choice (A):

                                  Images

    This does not match our expression, so we can rule out this choice.
    Choice (B):

                                  Images

    This does not match the original.
    Choice (C):

                                 Images

    This does not quite match the original.
    Choice (D):

                                 Images

    This matches the original expression, so the answer is choice (D).
    Another way to solve the problem is to factor. Since each term is
    divisible by 3, we can factor out a 3 to get:

                                 Images

    Next, we factor the expression inside the parenthesis as follows:

                                 Images

    This matches choice (D).

6. (A) Look at the answer choices. There are only three possible x values
    in the answer choices (13, 3, and −3), so it’s probably easiest to just
    plug in these three values for x in our original equation to see which
    ones work:
             Images

    The square root of 49 is 7, so 13 works.

                                 Images

    Square roots always give nonnegative answers, so this one doesn’t
    work.

                                 Images
    Only 13 works, so the answer is choice (A).
    You could also solve this directly by squaring both sides of the
    equation:

                                 Images

    Squaring gives:

                                 Images

    This is a quadratic equation. So we move everything over to one side,
    combine like terms, and factor:

                                 Images

    Factoring gives:

                                 Images

    So x = 13 or x = −3. Since we initially squared our equation, we have
    to check our answers since this procedure can lead to extraneous
    answers. Indeed, only x = 13 works. So 13 is the only solution to the
    equation.

7. (B) Functions intersect the x-axis at their zeros. Zeros can be found by
    setting the function equal to 0 and either factoring or using the
    quadratic formula to solve for possible values of x.

    The polynomial can be factored to (4x − 5)(2x − 3) = 0. Set each
    factor equal to 0 and solve for x:

                                 Images

    Adding 5 to both sides and then dividing by 4 gives you .
                                   Images

     Adding 3 to both sides then dividing by 2 gives you .
     Choice (B) is the answer.
     Alternatively, you could have used the quadratic formula:

                                   Images

8. (D) We are told that x is greater than 1, so the function will always be
    positive regardless of n. We are also told that n is an even integer, so
    this narrows down the answer to 2 or −2. In order for the function to
    increase most rapidly, you want the exponent n to be the largest even
    number possible, which is choice (D).

9. (A) If the dispersion of population x increases, the standard deviation
    of x increases. If the dispersion of population y increases, the standard
    deviation of y increases. Therefore, you’d be holding the numerator
    constant while increasing the denominator. Therefore, the correlation
    coefficient would decrease, which is choice (A).

10. (C) Multiplying a function by −1 will flip it about the x-axis. The new
    function will still cross the x-axis the same number of times at the
    same values of x as the original function. So the zeros will not change.
    If f(x) has 5 zeros, −f(x) will also have 5 zeros.
     Consider this simpler function to see how multiplying it by −1 would
     affect its graph.
     The graph of y = x2 − 5 is shown:

                                   Images

     If the function is multiplied by −1 on the right-hand side, it will give
     the function y = −x2 + 5, which is shown:
                                         Images

         So the functions have the same zeros even though they are mirror
         images of one another.

  Advanced Math Drill 2

   particular savings account provides no interest in the first year of a deposit
 nd 3% annual compounded interest on a deposit for each year thereafter. If x
 ollars are deposited initially, which of the following equations expresses the
  tal amount of money A(n) in the account n years later, where n is an integer
 reater than 2?

A) A(n) = x [(0 . 03)n]
B) A(n) = x [(0 . 97)n]
C) A(n) = x [(0 . 03)n−1]
D) A(n) = x [(1 . 03)n−1]

What is the value of x in the following equation?
                                      x2 + 9 = −6x

A) −3
B) 0
C) 3
D) No solution

 or y < 0, which of the following is equivalent to
A)
B)
C)
D)

 or positive x and y, is equivalent to
A)
B)
C)
D)

What are the possible values of x in the following equation?
                                   3x2 + 12x + 6 = 0

A) −12 ±
B) −2 ±
C) −2 ±
D) 2 ±

  x2 + x − 12 = 0 and if x < 0, what is the value of x?

A) −6
B) −4
C) −3
D) 3

 4x6 − 16y8 is equivalent to which of the following expressions?

A) 16(4x3 + y4)(x3 − y4)
B) 16(4x3 − y4)(x3 − y4)
C) 16(2x3 + y4)(2x3 − y4)
D) 16(2x6 − y8)(2x − y)

 olve the following equation for all possible x values.

A) 3
B) 3 and 8
C) −3 and −8
D) Infinitely many solutions

 he graph of x − 4 = y4 has a minimal x value that compares in what way to
 e minimal x value of the graph x = y4?

A) It is 4 less.
B) It is 4 greater.
C) They are the same.
D) The answer cannot be determined.

Which of the following functions represents the reflection across the x axis of
                                  y = 3(x − 5)2 + 4?

A) y = −3(x + 5)2 − 4
B) y = −3(x − 5)2 − 4
C) y = 3(−x − 5)2 + 4
D) y = 3(−x + 5)2 + 4

  Solutions
    1. (D) If 3% is added annually after the first year is complete, after the
        second year, 3% will have been added. Thus, after 2 years, the total
        amount of money in the account can be represented as: Images

         By combining like terms, it can also be expressed as:

                                      Images

         After three years, another 3% is added to the new amount:

                                      Images

         Continue in this manner. So after the fourth year, the amount of
         money in the account is x(1.03)3.
    Keeping this pattern in mind, the money in the account after n years
    is x(1.03)n −1, which is choice (D).
    Note that raising 1.03 to the n − 1 power means that you’re
    multiplying x by 1.03 one time less than the number of years that
    have passed. This is because no interest is added in the first year.

2. (A) Add the 6x to both sides so that the polynomial is equal to 0:

                                   Images

    You can either factor this or use the quadratic formula. This is easily
    factorable:

                                   Images

    You can set each factor equal to 0 to solve for the possible values of
    x. However, since they’re the same factor, you need to do it only
    once: Images
    Subtracting 3 from both sides tells you that x = −3, which is choice
    (A).

3. (B) The key here is to notice that in the problem, y < 0. In the original
    expression, x is squared. So regardless of its sign, x2 will be positive.
    Therefore, will be negative when y is negative. Thus, the new
    expression must also be negative.

    Simplify the answer choices to see which matches the original
    expression.
    Choice (A):
    Negative exponents get sent to the denominator:

                                   Images

    Roots can be expressed as fractional exponents:
                             Images

However, . So this is different than our original expression. We can
rule out choice (A).
Choice (B):
Following the same process as the previous answer choice, we can
rewrite this answer as:

                             Images

Now consider . It is tempting to say that this just equals , but we have
to be careful not to ignore a subtle point. When we take the fourth
root of something, or in general the even root of something, we
necessarily get a result that is nonnegative. In particular, must be
nonnegative. However, y is negative, so the expression can’t equal y.
The expression actually equals −y, which is positive since y is
negative.
(Convince yourself of this. For example, let y = −2 and consider .
This expression is equal to .) Thus, plugging in for in our expression
gives the following after canceling out the negative signs: Images
This is our original expression, so choice (B) must be the correct
answer.
If you wanted to explore the other answer choices, you could.
Choice (C):
By the same logic as before, this simplifies to:

                             Images

This clearly doesn’t match the original expression, so it can be
eliminated.
Choice (D):
    Simplifying gives:

                                 Images

    This is close to our original expression but has a negative sign in
    front, so we can eliminate this choice.

4. (C) Remember that negative exponents can be made positive by
    moving whatever is being raised to that exponent to the denominator:
  Images

    Fractional exponents are the same as roots:

                                 Images

    This doesn’t match any answer choices, so we need to simplify
    further. The y is being raised to a power higher than its root, so we
    should be able to pull something out of the root.
    Since y is positive:

                                 Images

    Therefore, our whole expression can be rewritten as:

                                 Images

    Choice (C) is the correct answer.

5. (B) Factor out a 3:

                                 Images

    Divide both sides by 3:

                                 Images
    This isn’t easily factorable, so use the quadratic formula:

                                  Images

    Choice (B) is the answer.

6. (B) We need to find all solutions less than 0. This equation is easily
    factorable:

                                  Images

    If x + 4 or x − 3 equaled 0, the whole expression would equal 0.
    Therefore, setting both factors equal to 0 will tell us the two potential
    values of x: Images
    The question asks for only the value of x that’s less than 0, so the
    answer is x = −4, which is choice (B).

7. (C) All of the answers have a 16 factored out, so do that first:
                                                                Images

    When anything is in the form (a2 − b2), it can be factored using the
    difference of squares formula: (a + b)(a − b). The trick to this
    problem is figuring out what a and b are. Set 4x6 equal to a2 to find a:
      Images
    Take the square root of both 4 and the x term:

                                  Images

    Next, set y8 equal to b2 to solve for b:

                                  Images

    Therefore, if you wanted to express (4x6 − y8) in the form of (a + b)(a
    − b), it would be: Images
    Putting the 16 in front gives you choice (C).
8. (B) Get rid of the square root by squaring both sides:

                                  Images

    To find the possible values of x, subtract 11x and add 24 to both sides,
    setting the left side equal to 0. Then factor or use the quadratic
    formula to solve: Images
    This equation factors as:

                                  Images

    This statement would hold true if x − 3 = 0 or if x − 8 = 0. In other
    words, the statement would hold true if x = 3 or if x = 8, which is
    choice (B).
    Be careful, though. When we squared both sides of the equation, we
    were no longer guaranteed to get the same exact solutions as our
    original equation. In other words, because we square both sides, it is
    possible that we get extraneous solutions. So we should get in the
    habit of checking that both of our solutions are indeed solutions. We
    can do this by plugging both answer choices into our original
    equation: Images
    This solution checks out.

                                  Images

    This solution checks out as well.
    In this problem, both solutions check out. However, you should be
    cautious in general when squaring equations.

9. (B) The first function can be expressed as           . It’s an even root.
    This means that the value within the root must be greater than or
    equal to 0 since we can find only the even root of a nonnegative

    number:
        Therefore, the domain of the function is [4, ∞).
        The second function can be expressed as         . Again, it’s an even
        root. So what’s within the root must be greater than or equal to 0: x ≥
        0
        The domain of this function then is [0, ∞).
        Therefore, the minimal x value of the first function is 4 more than the
        minimal x value of the second function. Choice (B) is the answer.

  10. (B) To reflect something across the x-axis, multiply the entire
      equation by −1:



        Alternatively, notice that our original function gives the equation of a
        parabola; think about what this parabola looks like. Recall that the
        vertex form of a parabola is y = a(x − h)2 + k. Our original parabola
        will open upward since a = 3 is positive. This parabola will also have
        a vertex at (h, k) = (5, 4). If you want to reflect this across the x- axis,
        it would need to open downward and have a vertex at (5, −4).
        Therefore, the vertex form of this new parabola would be:


        The answer is choice (B).

 Problem Solving and Data Analysis Drill

 there are 4 cars for every 5 trucks in the parking lot (with no other types of
ehicles), what is the ratio of cars to the total number of vehicles in the
arking lot?

A) 1 to 5
B) 4 to 9
C) 5 to 9
D) 4 to 5
  n Monday, the highest temperature reached was 70 degrees Fahrenheit. On
 uesday, the highest temperature increased by 20%. On Wednesday, the
  ghest temperature decreased by 25% from the previous day. What was the
  fference between Monday’s and Wednesday’s highest temperatures in
 egrees Fahrenheit?

A) 5
B) 7
C) 14
D) 21

  recipe calls for 3 cups of sugar. There are 16 tablespoons in a cup and 3
 aspoons in a tablespoon. If a cook has 1.5 cups of sugar available in the
 antry, how many teaspoons of sugar must the cook obtain from other sources
  follow the recipe?

A) 72
B) 104
C) 144
D) 216

                Price per Gallon of       Number of Gallons
                       Milk                    Sold
                        $1.50                      650
                        $0.90                      780
                        $1.95                      530
                        $2.80                      330
                        $3.40                      190


Which of these functions best models the relationship between the number of
 allons of milk sold, N(g), and the price per gallon of milk, g?

A) N(g) = 530 + 590(g − 1.95)2
B) N(g) = 1,000 − 240g
C) N(g) = 1,000 + 240g
D) N(g) = 780 − 360(g − 0.9)2

                                  Employed Unemployed
                    Population        890           112
                        X
                    Population        748           205

                        Y

What is the difference between the unemployment percentage in Population Y
nd the unemployment percentage in Populations X and Y combined,
alculated to the nearest tenth?

A) 5.0%
B) 5.3%
C) 5.8%
D) 6.2%
       Questions 6–7 use the following table.




 f all eligible voters in Columbus, 40% actually voted in the election. How
 any total eligible voters did Columbus have?

A) 248,000
B) 875,000
C) 1,550,000
D) 2,487,500

uppose that a survey of total 200 randomly selected voters from both cities
ccurately predicted the results of the election. How many of the people
urveyed would have been supporters of Candidate A from Columbus?

A) 50
B) 70
C) 113
D) 132
       Questions 8–9 use the following table.




he median letter grade for assignments in the class is:

A) A
B) B
C) C
D) D

or which assignment is the standard deviation of the grade results the least?

A) Test 1
B) Project 1
C) Test 2
D) Project 2
 n online shopping site allows customers to post 1-star, 2-star, 3-star, 4-star,
nd 5-star reviews for products. If an item currently has an average star rating
f 2.3 based on a total of 10 reviews, what is the minimum number of reviews
 at could bring up the overall average rating to at least a 3.0?

A) 2
B) 3
C) 4
D) 5

  Solutions

B) Let’s imagine the simplest version of this ratio: there are only 4 cars and 5
ucks in the parking lot. So how many total vehicles are there?



o the ratio of cars to vehicles is 4 cars to 9 vehicles, choice (B).

B) If the highest temperature on Tuesday increased 20% from the highest
 mperature on Monday, then the highest temperature on Tuesday was 120%,
r 1.2, of Monday’s temperature. Find 120% of 70 degrees:

o Tuesday’s high temperature was 84 degrees Fahrenheit. Wednesday’s high
as 25% lower than Tuesday’s temperature, so it was only 75%, or 0.75, of
uesday’s temperature. Find 75% of 84 degrees:
he highest temperature on Wednesday was 63 degrees Fahrenheit. We want
 know the difference between Monday’s high temperature and Wednesday’s
gh. The difference is given by 70 − 63 = 7, which is choice (B).

A) If a cook has 1.5 cups of sugar in the pantry but needs 3 cups, he needs 3 −
 5 = 1.5 more cups from other sources. We want to convert this to teaspoons:



he answer is choice (A).
B) Test the answer choices.
 hoice (A):



 his is a fairly good estimate, so let’s try another value:



We can rule out choice (A).
 hoice (B):



 his is also a fairly good estimate, so let’s try the other values:




 ll of these values are pretty close to the actual values, so this answer choice
 ay be correct. However, the question asks for the best model, so we need to
 ake sure that there are no better models.
 hoice (C):



We can rule out choice (C).
 hoice (D):
We can rule out choice (D).
 hoice (B) is the best model of the relationship.

B) In Population Y, 205 of the 748 + 205 = 953 people are unemployed.
herefore, the unemployment percentage is:



n both populations combined, there are a total of 112 + 205 = 317
nemployed people, and a total population of 890 + 112 + 748 + 205 = 1,955.
 herefore, the unemployment rate is:
 he difference between the two unemployment rates is 21.51% − 16.21% =
 3%, which is choice (B).

C) The number of people who voted in Columbus was 620,000. If this
umber represents only 40% of eligible voters, you can set up a proportion to
olve for 100% of the number of eligible voters:

n the proportion, x represents the number of eligible voters in Columbus.
 ross multiply to get:




 ividing by 40 tells you that x = 1,550,000, which is choice (C).
 nother way we can solve this problem is as follows. We know that 620,000 is
 0% of the eligible voters, x, in Columbus. In other words, 620,000 = 0.4x.
 ividing by 0.4 gives 1,550,000, which is choice (C).

B) Since there are 350,000 Columbus voters who support Candidate A and
95,000 voters in the two cities combined, we know that              of the
oters in the table were supporters of Candidate A from Columbus. We would
xpect the same proportion of the 200 randomly surveyed voters to be
upporters of Candidate A from Columbus. This can be found by taking
 352(200) = 70.4. Thus, we could expect about 70 of the randomly surveyed
  fall into this category. So the correct answer is choice (B).

B) There are 94 total grades. To find the median term in a series with an even
umber of terms, you have to take the mean of the two middle terms. To find
 ese two middle terms, first divide the total number of terms by 2. This will
 ll you the number of the 1st term you’ll use in your average. Then add 1 to
 at number to find the number of the 2nd term you’ll use in your average.
 we listed all 94 grades starting with the lowest grades, the F’s, and ending
ith the highest grades, the A’s, the median terms would be the average of the
        term and the               term.

’s take us through the first 5 terms.
’s take us through 10 more, to the 15th term.
’s take us through another 22, to the 15 + 22 = 37th term.
’s take us through another 28 to the 37 + 28 = 65th term. The 47th and 48th
rms will then both be B’s, so the median grade is a B, which is choice (B).

D) Standard deviation is usually lowest when range is lowest because it
 eans that more values are centered near the mean. Because no one received
n F on project 2, the range was only between an A and a D, with only two
eople receiving D’s. Because this project has a rather small range, it will have
 rather small standard deviation. In all of the other assignments, at least one
 udent earned an A and at least one earned an F, so the ranges will be higher
or all other answer choices. Thus, choice (D) is the best choice.

C) An average (in other words, a mean) is given by the following expression:



n the expression, “sum” is the total of the terms you’re averaging and n is the
umber of terms you’re averaging. In order to calculate the minimum number
f reviews needed to raise the mean to a 3.0, we’ll need to know the sum of
 e current ratings. Plugging the numbers into the equation gives:
herefore, the sum of the current ratings is 2.3(10) = 23.
n order to raise the average with the minimum number of reviews, the reviews
eed to all be as high as possible, so they must all be 5-star reviews.
et’s test our answer choices. When plugging in answer choices, start with one
f the middle answers since answers tend to be arranged from smallest to
 rgest or from largest to smallest.
hoice (B):
 the product gets 3 new 5-star reviews, this will add 3(5) = 15 to our current
um. This will also add 3 to our current n:




he mean is not high enough yet, so we need more reviews.
hoice (C):
 the product gets 4 new 5-star reviews, this will add 4(5) = 20 to our current
um and 4 to our current n:



his mean is higher than our desired mean, so 4 is the minimum number of
views needed, choice (C).
lternatively, you could have solved this algebraically. Adding x more 5-star
views will add 5x to the sum and x to n, the total number of reviews.
herefore, the mean can be represented with the following equation:


ince we know we want the mean to be 3.0, we can set the right side of our
quation equal to 3.0:
et’s get rid of the denominator by multiplying both sides by (10 + x):



ombine like terms by subtracting 3.0x and 23 from both sides:



 ividing both sides by 2.0 tells you that the minimum number of new reviews
eeded is 3.5. Recall that we want the minimum number of reviews needed to
 ise the average to a 3.0. Since 3 reviews would not be enough and a person
an’t give 0.5 of a review, we must round up to the nearest integer, 4.
herefore, to raise the average to a 3.0, you need 4 new reviews.

 Geometry and Trigonometry Drill

  box in the shape of a rectangular prism has dimensions 20 inches by 30
 ches by 12 inches. Inside the box are four solid cubes, each with edge
 ngths of 4 inches. If the inside of the larger box is empty except for the solid
ubes, what is the volume of empty space in the box?

A) 248 cubic inches
B) 1,800 cubic inches
C) 6,944 cubic inches
D) 7,200 cubic inches

 right triangle has a hypotenuse of 10 inches and legs that measure 8 inches
nd 6 inches. What is the area of the triangle in square inches?

A) 12
B) 18
C) 24
D) 36
n triangle ACD above, point B is on AC, and B and D form a line. What is the
um of ∠x and ∠y in degrees?

A) 100
B) 110
C) 120
D) 140

 a circle has the equation (x − 4)2 + (y − 6)2 = 9, what is the equation of the
rcle if it is reflected directly across the x-axis?

A) (x + 4)2 + (y + 6)2 = − 9
B) (x − 4)2 − (y + 6)2 = − 9
C) (x + 4)2 − (y + 6)2 = 9
D) (x − 4)2 + (y + 6)2 = 9

 the area of an equilateral triangle is 2   square units, what is the perimeter
f the triangle?

A) 6
B)
C)
D)

iven that ∠X is between 0 and 90 degrees, and that cos X = Y, what is the
ne of an angle with the measure (90 − X) degrees?
A) 90 − Y
B) Y
C)
D) 90

n angle measuring 3π radians would be equivalent to how many angles with
measure of 45°?

A) 4
B) 8
C) 9
D) 12




riangles ABC and DEF are similar to one another. If the cosine of ∠BAC is
 , and the length of DE is 24 units, what is the length of DF?

A) 14
B) 20
C) 26
D) 30
ver a 20-second time period, Jeff runs in a circle of 8 feet in radius around a
ole. Assuming that Jeff starts the time period at a radius of 8 feet from the
ole, the graph during this interval of his time (as the x-coordinates) and his
 stance from the pole (as the y-coordinates) would have a slope of what?

A) −1
B) 0
C) 1
D) 2

  rectangular dog park is x feet wide and y feet long. The park is to be fenced
  along its sides with wooden material, except for part of one side where there
 ill be a metal gate that is g feet long. How long must the fence material be in
rder to meet these conditions?

A) 2x + 2y − g
B) 2x + 2y + g
C) xy − g
D) xyg

  Solutions

C) Calculate the volume of the larger box, and then subtract the volume of the
 solid cubes to find the volume of empty space. Use V = lwh to calculate the
olume of each rectangular prism.




C) Since the triangle has a right angle, the two legs would be the height and
 e base of the triangle. So, we can consider 8 as the base and 6 as the height.
he area formula for a triangle is            . Plug in 8 and 6 to this formula to
et your answer:
A) The angles with measures 30°, 50°, x, and y all add up to form 180° since
 ey are angles within the triangle ACD. Therefore, you can solve for the sum
f x and y by subtracting 30 and 50 from 180:

D) Based on the circle equation, in which (x − h)2 + (y − k)2 = r2, with (h, k)
s the center and r as the radius, the original circle will have a center at (4, 6)
nd radius of 3. To reflect this circle, which is entirely in the first quadrant,
cross the x-axis, just change the y-coordinate of its center to −6. The reflected
 rcle will have an equation of (x − 4)2 + (y + 6)2 = 9 and the reflection is




rawn below:
C) To find the perimeter of the of the triangle, we must add up the three side
 ngths of the triangle. The formula for the area of an equilateral triangle is
        , in which a is the side length. So, solve for the side length of the




iangle given that we know its area:

ow, just triple the side length to find the perimeter:



B) Since X and (90 − X) are complementary, the sine of one will equal the
osine of the other. Therefore, the sine of (90 − X) is simply Y.

D) There are π radians in 180°, so set up a proportion to make a conversion to
 e total number of degrees in an angle measuring 3π radians:




ow, divide 540 by 45 to see how many angles of 45° would go into 540:



C) Set up a proportion to solve for the length of DF. The cosine of ∠BAC is
 e same as the cosine of ∠EDF since the triangles are similar to one another.
et the cosine of ∠BAC equal to the cosine of ∠EDF, using 24 as the


adjacent” side and the unknown DF as the hypotenuse:
B) Since the distance that Jeff is from the center remains 8 over the time
eriod, the slope of the line formed by these values would simply be zero since
 e line would be horizontal.

A) Find the perimeter of the rectangular dog park by adding the width twice
nd the length twice:



 hen, subtract the length of the metal gate from this total to find the total
 mount of wooden material required:



  Mixed Drill

Which of the following lines is perpendicular to 5y − 2.5x = −10?

A) y = −2x + 8
B) y = 0.5x + 2
C) y = 2x − 7
D) y = 0.4x + 10
       Questions 2–3 use the following table.




 he least possible median age of those surveyed would be which of the
ollowing?

A) 13
B) 15
C) 19
D) Cannot be determined from the given information

he mean number of hours of sleep of all those surveyed is

A) 6.5
B) 7.5
C) 8.5
D) Cannot be determined from the given information

or values of a not equal to zero,    equals

A) 2a−2
B) 12a−2
C)
D) 64a−2




he graph of y = f(x) is shown above. Which of the following graphs best
presents the graph of y =| f(x)|?
A)




B)




C)
D)




Which of the following is equivalent to (6x3 + 3x2 − 1) + (4x3 − 4x2 + 2x + 3)?

A) 11x6 + 2
B) 10x3 − 7x2 + 2x + 2
C) 10x3 − x2 + x + 3
D) 10x3 − x2 + 2x + 2

 eter makes $15 per hour when he works 40 hours a week. For each hour
 xceeding 40, he is paid 50% more than his usual hourly rate. Assuming that
 eter has worked at least 40 hours in a particular week, which inequality
 roperly expresses the range of hours, h, he must work to make over $800 in
  at week?

A) 800 < 600 + 22.5 × (h − 40)
B) 800 < 600 + 22.5h
C) 800 < 600 + 7.5 × (h − 40)
D) 800 < 40 + 15h

n the xy-plane below, ABC is an equilateral triangle with sides of length 2. If
oint A has coordinates (−2, 0), what are the coordinates of point B?
A) (−    , −3)
B) (−2, − )
C) (−3, )
D) (−3, −    )

n a pet store with 30 customers, 60% of the customers like dogs and 11
ustomers like cats. What is the minimum number of customers who like both
ats and dogs?

A) 0
B) 1
C) 4
D) 7

he function f is defined below. If f (n) and n are both integers, what is the
rgest value that n can be?




A) 0
B) 301
C) 316
D) 426
  Solutions

A) We first need to get the given line into slope-intercept form, i.e., y = mx +
 so that we can easily see the slope. Begin by adding 2.5x to both sides:


 ow divide by 5:



he slope of this line is . The slope of a line perpendicular to this will have a
ope that is the negative reciprocal of . The negative reciprocal of is −2,
nd only choice (A) has a slope of −2.

A) There were 118 people surveyed. If you lined up the people by age, the
 edian age would be the average of the 59th and 60th persons. (Prove this to
ourself. If you have a series of four terms, the median is between your second
nd third term. Divide your even number by 2 to get the first term, and add 1
  get the next.) The first 24 people are younger than 13.

eople numbered 25−68 are between ages 13 and 18. Therefore, the 59th and
0th people are both within this age category. If this whole age group were 13
or even if all but 8 of them were), then the median age would be 13. This is
 e least possible age in this category, so it is the least possible median age.

D) Without knowing everyone’s exact response or the average number of
ours slept per group, we can’t calculate the mean. There’s no way to add up
 e responses without knowing the responses or averages of the responses.

D) Raising a fraction to an exponent raises both the numerator and the
enominator to that exponent:
oots can be written as fractional exponents. So the expression can be
written as:




  simplifies to a2:




 n exponent in the denominator of a fraction can be expressed as a negative
xponent in the numerator:



hoice (D) is the answer.

A) If the new function is the absolute value of the old function, the graphs
hould be the same in all of the places where y is already 0 or positive. This
 cludes the intervals from −5 ≤ x ≤ −3 and from −1 ≤ x ≤ 1.5. The values for
 hen the function is below the x-axis, −3 < x < −1 and 1.5 < x < 6, will simply
e their positive counterparts; they will be reflected above the x-axis.
he only graph that shows this relationship is choice (A).

D) There’s nothing to distribute, so you can just get rid of the parentheses and
ombine like terms:



’s probably easiest if you start with the highest degree of x and move
ownward:
here’s a 6x3 term and a 4x3 term. Combine these:
ext, there’s 3x2 and −4x2:



here’s only one term with an x in it, so move on to the constant terms: −1 and




his corresponds to choice (D).

A) If Peter wants to make at least $800, we can come up with an expression
or the amount of money that he’ll make working h number of hours and set
 at expression greater than 800: Amount of money Peter makes weekly > 800

he problem states that he makes $15/hour for his first 40 hours, and we
ssume that he’s already worked 40 hours this week. Thus, Peter will make
15(40) = $600 for those 40 hours. This is a fixed constant.
or every hour after his 40th hour, he makes 50% more than his original
ourly wage, for a total of 150% of his hourly wage. Thus, every hour Peter
orks after his 40th hour, he makes 1.5($15) = $22.50.
owever, we can’t just express this as 22.5h, because that would imply that
eter makes $22.50 for every single hour that he works rather than for just the
ours past 40. Thus, it must be expressed as 22.5(h − 40).
o see that this is true, we can plug 41 in for h to see that for the 41st hour he
orks, Peter makes an extra:



his is what we would expect.
ur total expression for the amount of money Peter makes for working h
ours, then, is:
 lug this into our original inequality to get:



 his is the same as choice (A).

D)




We are told that this triangle is equilateral, so each of the three angles is 60°.
We are also told that point A has coordinates (−2, 0). Since point C is on the x-
 xis and is 2 units to the left of point A, point C must have coordinates (−4, 0).
 y drawing a line that starts halfway between points A and C and bisects the
 ngle at point B, as shown in the drawing, we can split this equilateral triangle
  to two 30-60-90 triangles. Because the equilateral triangle has side lengths of
  and the line splits the side along the x-axis in half, the new triangles have
 de lengths of 1 along the x-axis.
 ou can see, then, that point B has an x value 1 unit from both point A’s and
 oint C ’s x values. Because points A and C have x values of −2 and −4,
  spectively, point B will have an x value of −3.
 ou may remember that a 30-60-90 triangle is a special right triangle that has
 pposite side lengths of 1, , and 2, respectively. Since you’ve already found
 de lengths of 1 and 2, the dotted line will have a length of . Because it’s in
 e negative y direction, it will have a y-coordinate of − . Therefore, the
oordinates for point B are (− 3, − ).
 lternatively, if you didn’t remember the 30-60-90 triangle, you could have
sed the
ythagorean theorem with the two known side lengths to find the third length:




ubtract 1 from both sides:



o find b, take the square root of both sides:



o the third side has a length of   .

A) We are told that 60% of the customers like dogs. Since there are 30
ustomers, 0.6(30) = 18 customers like dogs. We are also told that 11 people
ke cats. It is possible that 18 customers like only dogs, 11 people like only
ats, and 30 − 18 − 11 = 1 person likes neither. Thus, the minimum number of
ustomers who necessarily like both is 0, choice (A).

C) If f (n) needs to be an integer and we want a number in the denominator
 ) to be as large as possible, that means we’re looking for the smallest
ossible integer for f (n). This integer must be positive. Because the numerator
 positive and the denominator is being raised to an even root, the
enominator must be positive as well. The smallest possible positive integer is
  so set f (n) equal to 1. If f (n) is 1, the denominator must be 2 since is the
nly fraction with a numerator of 2 that equals 1. Thus, set the denominator
qual to 2:

aise both sides to the fourth power:
dd 300 to both sides:



ou can plug this number back in to the original expression to verify.
             PART 6
Practice Tests 1 and 2
SAT Test Overview

This SAT Practice Test is made up of a Reading and Writing section and a
Math section. On these two non-adaptive practice tests, the second module
of each section is more challenging than the first module of each section.

Note: In this book, there is an answer sheet you can use to write down your
letter choices and math answers. Feel free to use the sheet to record your
answers or simply circle and write down your answers in the test as you go.

Section 1: Reading and Writing (54 Questions)

There are two 27-question modules in the Reading and Writing section.

Section 2: Math (44 Questions)

There are two 22-question modules in the Math section. You can use a
calculator throughout the math section.

Modules
The modules in each section are timed separately. You can review your
answers in each module before time expires. When the time reaches zero,
you will automatically move on to the next section. You are unable to return
to a completed module.

Directions
At the beginning of each section, there are directions for answering the
questions.
Practice Test 1

Section 1, Module 1: Reading and Writing
32 MINUTES, 27 QUESTIONS


DIRECTIONS
             You will be tested on a variety of important reading and writing skills. Each question
             has one or more passages, possibly including a graph or table. Carefully read each
             passage and question and choose the best answer to the question based on the
             passage(s).
             Every question in this section is multiple-choice, with four possible answers. Each
             question has only one best answer.




The boss said to _______. The rain made the work impossible, and half the
materials hadn’t been delivered on time. He was too frustrated to think!

 1
Which choice completes the text with the most logical and precise word or
phrase?

        do what you can
        start the work
        appreciate the sunlight             call it a day
Emily had _________ about being invited to Kayla’s house. The last time
they hung out it hadn’t gone very well. In fact, Emily had stormed out
angrily after Kayla made some rude comments.

 2
Which choice completes the text with the most logical and precise word or
phrase?

        detainments
        territories
        reservations
        anticipation

The basic engineering degrees—mechanical, electrical, chemical, and civil
—are consistently ranked in the top ten degrees in terms of __________
after graduation. As such, someone who wants to earn a high salary in a job
after graduation may find an engineering degree to be a good fit.

 3
Which choice completes the text with the most logical and precise word or
phrase?

        expenditure
        compensation
        enterprises
        reimbursement

The issue is that car testers just don’t use female dummies. A female
dummy was first requested by testers in the 1980s and wasn’t incorporated
into tests by the National Highway Safety and Traffic Administration
(NHSTA) until 2003. That female dummy is not adjusted in any way to
make up for the difference in shape and composition between men and
women—it is just a miniaturized model of the male dummy. In fact, it is so
_________ that it only represents the smallest 5 percent of women. In
addition, it is only used as a passenger in testing, never as a driver.

 4
Which choice completes the text with the most logical and precise word or
phrase?

        augmented
        built up
        scaled down
        abbreviated

Psychological researchers should be more modest about the certainty of
data that involves human behavior. After all, human behavior is more
difficult to _________ measure than criteria that other scientific fields
assess, like temperature or velocity.

 5
Which choice completes the text with the most logical and precise word or
phrase?

        impulsively
        subjectively
        irrationally
        objectively

Nobody wants to feel easily influenced. Yet, I beg you to hear me out:
advertising is everywhere because it works. U.S. companies spend an
annual $70 billion in television ads, and this is before we take a look at
other mediums of advertising like radios, magazines, website cookies, and
even social media “sponsored” ads.

 6
Which choice best describes the function of the underlined sentence in the
text as a whole?

        To explain the process by which advertising is created      To
         critique corporations for misleading, unethical practices     To
         give concrete evidence to illustrate the expanse of advertising
           To demonstrate instances when consumers feel consciously
         manipulated The following text is from Walt Whitman’s 1891
         poem “A Promise to California.” The poem was written in the
         aftermath of the U.S. Civil War when the country was trying to
         heal its emotional wounds.

     A promise to California,
     Also to the great Pastoral Plains, and for Oregon:
     Sojourning east a while longer, soon I travel toward you, to remain, to
        teach robust American love;
     For I know very well that I and robust love belong among you, inland,
        and along the Western Sea;
     For These States tend inland, and toward the Western Sea—and I will
        also.

 7
Which choice best states the main purpose of the text?

        It outlines how with the skilled narrator’s leadership the United
         States will gain new territory.
        It draws a comparison between how just as the United States has
         spread, so will the narrator’s love spread.
        It compares the geographic and economic features of several U.S.
         states.
        It sketches a plan for national harmony amidst an ongoing bloody
         conflict.
8. The following text is adapted from F. Scott Fitzgerald’s 1920 novel This
Side of Paradise. The novel opens with the following character introduction
of Fitzgerald’s semi-autobiographical protagonist, Amory Blaine.

     “Amory.”
     “Yes, Beatrice.” (Such a quaint name for his mother; she encouraged it.)
     “Dear, don’t think of getting out of bed yet. I’ve always suspected that
     early rising in early life makes one nervous. Clothilde is having your
     breakfast brought up.”
     “All right.”
     “I am feeling very old to-day, Amory,” she would sigh, her face a rare
     cameo of pathos, her voice exquisitely modulated, her hands as facile as
     Bernhardt’s. “My nerves are on edge—on edge. We must leave this
     terrifying place to-morrow and go searching for sunshine.”

 8
Amory’s relationship with his mother is best described as

          traditionally pious.
          unusually friendly.
          blatantly disrespectful.
          cold and distant.

An English professor analyzes the 1917 poem titled “The River Merchant’s
Life: A Letter” by Li Bai, translated by Ezra Pound. The professor claims
that the poem emphasizes the narrator’s desire for reunification with her
departed husband: ______________

 9
Which quotation from the poem most effectively illustrates the claim?
            “While my hair was still cut straight across my forehead / I played
             about the front gate, pulling flowers.”
            “Lowering my head, I looked at the wall. / Called to, a thousand
             times, I never looked back.”
            “You went into far Ku-to-en, by the river of swirling eddies, / And
             you have been gone five months.”
            “If you are coming down through the narrows of the river, / Please
             let me know beforehand, / And I will come out to meet you.”

                                           Table 1

                                                                   Nitrogen Removal
               Crop                 Yield (Unit/Acre)               (Pounds/Acre)
 Barley                                        40                              30
 Corn                                          50                              35
 Soybeans                                      30                             103
 Wheat                                         40                              42
 Corn Silage                                   15                             116
 Grass-Legume Hay                               2                              87

All data is sourced from the University of Delaware, Nitrogen Removal by Delaware Crops.


    In general, crop rotation is fairly simple. In one year, a nitrogen-fixing
    plant, like a legume, will be planted. These crops deposit nitrogen into
    the soil. The following year a nitrogen-depleting crop should be planted
    and will thrive. This process can be repeated with different crops, all of
    which will either fix or remove nitrogen. For example, after planting a
    legume in a field for a growing season, a farmer would be well advised
    to plant _________.

 10
Which choice most effectively uses data from the graph to complete the
example?
           barley, because it has a relatively high rate of nitrogen removal
              corn silage, because it has a relatively high rate of nitrogen
            removal       corn, because it has a relatively low rate of nitrogen
            removal       wheat, because it has a relatively low rate of nitrogen
            removal The following is an adaptation of remarks given by Don
            Evans (the secretary of commerce under George W. Bush) as part
            of a panel at an economics conference in December of 2004.
            Note: A tort is a type of lawsuit.

      I was in Missouri this last year, and I had a chance to really see up close
      and personal how [increased costs from healthcare lawsuits are]
      impacting the health care industry. I talked to a David Carpenter, who is
      the CEO of North Kansas City Hospital, and what he told me was that
      there had been 30 doctors that had moved from Missouri to Kansas
      because Kansas had, indeed, passed tort reform and had put some caps
      in place. So, you see it happening all across America, where doctors are
      moving around and trying to find a more friendly environment.

 11
Which of the following findings, if true, would best support Evans’s overall
argument as presented in the text?

           A survey of medical doctors indicated that 85% of them prefer to
            work close to the community of patients they treat.
           Cities with unlimited caps on business lawsuit payouts had 15%
            overall greater life satisfaction among residents than cities that
            limited such payouts.
           States with tort reforms in place saw 20% more businesses relocate
            to their territories than states without such reforms.
           Medical practices are 30% more likely to move to states with
            populations in excess of 10,000,000 residents.

“An Encounter” is part of James Joyce’s 1914 short story collection,
Dubliners. A young, unnamed narrator searches for release from the
constraints of daily routine. An English student claims that the narrator’s
willingness to follow the intellectual requirements of his school could best
be described as “half-hearted: ___________”

 12
Which quotation from “An Encounter” most effectively illustrates this
claim?

         “Everyone was incredulous when it was reported that he had a
          vocation for the priesthood. Nevertheless it was true.”
         “This page or this page? This page? Now, Dillon, up! ‘Hardly had
          the day’ . . . Go on! What day? ‘Hardly had the day dawned’ . . .
          Have you studied it? What have you there in your pocket?”
         “I’m surprised at boys like you, educated, reading such stuff. I
          could understand it if you were . . . National School boys. Now,
          Dillon, I advise you strongly, get at your work or . . .”
         “But when the restraining influence of the school was at a distance
          I began to hunger again for wild sensations, for the escape which
          those chronicles of disorder alone seemed to offer me.”

Many studies suggest that while exercising and having a healthy diet can
drastically reduce the concentration of cholesterol in our blood, genes do
play a crucial role in an individual’s risk of cardiovascular disease. The
strong role genes play in cholesterol processing is seen in bears, especially
polar bears. Polar bears are among the most fat-obsessed members of the
animal kingdom, yet they do not experience any cardiovascular
complications. About half of a polar bear’s weight is fat and its blood
cholesterol levels are high enough that they would cause serious
cardiovascular disease in humans; even so, _________

 13
Which choice most logically completes the text?
        polar bears have a varied diet despite the harsh environment in
         which they live.
        heart attacks are not a concern for polar bears.
        polar bears are equally susceptible to cardiac issues.
        cardiovascular disease remains a leading cause of death.

As Mendeleev assembled the periodic table, he had noticed several gaps in
the pattern of properties which—cleverly—he hypothesized to be areas held
by yet undiscovered elements. Apart from reserving space on the table for
these elements, he went so far as to predict not only their existence, but
their chemical properties as well. Several years later, the spectroscopic
discovery of one of these elements—specifically gallium—and the
confirmation of Mendeleev’s predictions caused the popularity of his theory
to skyrocket, and ______________

 14
Which choice most logically completes the text?

        his contemporaries allowed Mendeleev a limited degree of credit
         for his work.
        applications to anatomical and zoological research naturally
         followed.
        Mendeleev’s scientific curiosity finally found an outlet.
        the periodic table quickly became a standard fixture in the study of
         chemistry.

Birdfeeders attract birds, but they also attract foragers like squirrels and
chipmunks. There are several methods for keeping them away from feeders;
a common one is putting the feeder on a tall pole at least five feet away
from bushes and trees and adding a _________

 15
Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the conventions of
Standard English?

        baffle; a cone-shaped device that prevents squirrels from climbing
         the pole.
        baffle: a cone-shaped device that prevents—squirrels from
         climbing the pole.
        baffle (a cone-shaped device that prevents squirrels from climbing
         the pole).
        baffle, a cone-shaped device, that prevents squirrels from climbing
         the pole.

In a situation where CPR is being administered in a public space, oftentimes
no one calls medics because they assume someone else already _________

 16
Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the conventions of
Standard English?

        has.
        have had.
        have.
        are.

Today, the concept of the high school rock band __________ yet students
still have lofty dreams of making a career out of something equally
improbable: social media.

 17
Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the conventions of
Standard English?
         is out of a bit of style,     is of style out a bit,  style is a bit out
          of,     is a bit out of style, The possibility of becoming a
          physician assistant or a nurse practitioner allows students to
          become health care professionals who _________ people without
          the rigors of medical school and the associated student debt.

 18
Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the conventions of
Standard English?

         helps
         helping
         helped
         help

Rodents only make up a portion of a _____________ Servals will also use
their large ears to listen carefully for the flutter of bird wings overhead or
the buzz of an insect nearby.

 19
Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the conventions of
Standard English?

         serval’s diet.
         servals diets.
         servals’ diet.
         serval’s diets’.

Schrödinger posited the issue of when superposition collapses into reality—
when multiple occupying states simultaneously _________ one or the other.

 20
Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the conventions of
Standard English?

        becomes
        become
        have becoming
        had becoming

Even in his short life, Cannon managed to make an enduring difference.
_______________ In his wake, Native American art was refreshed, moving
away from strict rules that had governed traditional forms and into a new
space where artists could be more expressive by using traditional styles and
concepts while incorporating modern ideas and inspirations.

 21
Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the conventions of
Standard English?

        Art historians trace the resurgence and change; in Native American
         art to a movement that started with Cannon.
        Art historians trace the resurgence, and change in Native American
         art to a movement that started with Cannon.
        Art historians trace the resurgence and change in Native American
         art to a movement that started with Cannon.
        Art historians trace the resurgence and change in Native American
         art—to a movement—that started with Cannon.

Melodies are so loved that people will hum them even when they are trying
to concentrate on other things. Beats are so universally loved that babies
will dance to them, and hard-of-hearing people will seek out their
vibrations. _____________ in music. Humans, since the very beginning of
our species, have used them to express joy, sadness, heartache, love, and
pain.
 22
Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the conventions of
Standard English?

        These two things (the melodical notes and the beats), come
         together     These two things the melodical notes and the beats,
         come together       These two things—the melodical notes and the
         beats—come together         These two things—the melodical notes
         and the beats, come together Technology has transformed how job
         seekers should present their qualifications to prospective
         employers. __________ the old paper resume needed to be
         concise and fit within the scope of one or two pages, your online
         career profile can be much more thorough.

 23
Which choice completes the text with the most logical transition?

        Whereas
        Since
        Because
        Moreover

Working class families will continue to buy only in neighborhoods where
they can afford homes, and where home values are unpredictable.
__________ they will face further financial instability; meanwhile, the
privileged few who can afford to purchase real estate in New York,
Chicago, London, and so on, will see their returns peak.

 24
Which choice completes the text with the most logical transition?

        Unexpectedly,
        Paradoxically,
         In contrast,
         Hence,

While conducting research, a student took these notes:

      Gyoja monks, also known as Marathon monks, are a Buddhist group in
      Japan.
      Each monk, over seven years, walks around 27,000 miles, generally at
      a rate of 25 miles per day for months on end.
      Toward the end of the seven years, the monks will walk up to 52 miles
      per day.
      The grueling physical demands of completing this task on little food or
      sleep often proves to be fatal—only around 50 monks have completed
      the task in the past 135 years.
      This challenge of prayer, meditation, and physical discipline, when
      completed, leads to the monk being known as a living saint.

 25
The student wants to emphasize the physical demands of being a Gyoja
monk. Which choice most effectively uses relevant information from the
notes to accomplish this goal?

         The Gyoja monks walk up to an incredible 52 miles per day on
          very little food and sleep.
         Gyoja monks sometimes walk about 25 miles per day, a task that
          many people might find challenging.
         Those who want to become Gyoja monks must dedicate seven
          straight years of their lives to this challenge.
         While the spiritual introspection might be psychologically
         burdensome, the public recognition makes the work worthwhile.

While researching a topic, a student has taken the following notes:
      The type of springs used in the seating surface of furniture impacts
      comfort and durability.
      Furniture constructed with eight-way hand-tied coil springs can be
      expected to be extremely durable and very comfortable to sit on.
      Eight-way hand-tied coil springs involve a labor-intensive fabrication
      process.
      Sinuous springs are more common than eight-way hand-tied coil
      springs.
      Sinuous springs have a wide range of costs due to flexibility in the
      quality of the materials used.

 26
The student wants to make a generalization about the makeup of typical
furniture. Which choice most effectively uses relevant information from the
notes to accomplish this goal?

         Since most consumers seek to maximize comfort, it is more likely
          that coil springs would be found in a typical piece of furniture
          than would sinuous springs.
         Most pieces of furniture are made using a labor-intensive crafting
         process.
         It is more likely that the springs in an everyday piece of furniture
          are sinuous than coil.
         Both sinuous and coil springs are found throughout the
          components of typical furniture, from the backs to the seats.

While researching a topic, a student has taken the following notes:

      Offshore wind farms are an increasingly viable source of renewable
      energy.
      These wind farms are typically located on the surface of the ocean near
      coastal cities.
      The average wind speed offshore tends to be higher than on land since
      there are fewer geographical obstacles to wind gusts.
      Wind farms can often be placed relatively close to major coastal urban
      areas, thereby reducing the distance needed for electricity
      transmission.
      While wind farms offshore are promising, increased research should be
      done to minimize the maintenance costs for these facilities.

 27
The student wants to point out a reason why an offshore wind farm would
be better than a land-based wind farm. Which choice most effectively uses
relevant information from the notes to accomplish this goal?

         Since offshore wind farms provide the possibility of renewable
          energy, builders should utilize them instead of land-based wind
          farms.
         Given the higher typical wind speeds offshore, offshore wind farms
          are more sensible than land-based ones.
         The convenience of having the source of electricity closer to major
          urban areas makes land-based wind farms more promising than
          offshore ones.
         The higher maintenance costs associated with offshore wind farms
          make them less viable than land-based ones.
Section 1, Module 2, Reading and Writing
32 MINUTES, 27 QUESTIONS


DIRECTIONS
             You will be tested on a variety of important reading and writing skills. Each question
             has one or more passages, possibly including a graph or table. Carefully read each
             passage and question and choose the best answer to the question based on the
             passage(s).
             Every question in this section is multiple-choice, with four possible answers. Each
             question has only one best answer.




We rarely pause mid-recipe to consider the chemistry of cooking, but
understanding the chemical reactions occurring in our food will help us to
become better cooks. Isn’t that some food for thought?

 1
As used in the text, what does the phrase “some food for thought” most
nearly mean?

        An appetizing situation
        A next step for researchers
        A plan for actionable change
        Something worth considering

Despite the wide applicability of the ABC-X model, like any other theory, it
has faced critiques of its usefulness. One of the major critiques is its focus
on serious stressor events and inaccessibility to smaller, everyday stressors.
Another _________ is its inability to consider how multiple stressors may
affect the current stressor situation.

 2
Which choice completes the text with the most logical and precise word or
phrase?

         drawback
         assessment
         trauma
         rumination

Tests should operate as an assessment of what is practiced daily inside the
classroom. Classroom teachers who teach to well-written standards
___________ that students are prepared for the next grade level.

 3
Which choice completes the text with the most logical and precise word or
phrase?

         assure
         insure
         ensure
         reassure

A folklorist may enter a city or village or subculture and begin to participate
in that population’s day-to-day life. Possibly, they may end up studying a
story, a joke, a dance, a dish, or even a child’s game—an apparently trivial
practice that, when looked at closely, turns out to be quite __________.

 4
Which choice completes the text with the most logical and precise word or
phrase?

        insignificant
        substantive
        imbecilic
        exuberant

In the 1990s, amidst concern for its effect on wildlife, DDT was largely
banned; bedbugs slowly began their comeback. By 2010 their numbers
were spiking. Because of a huge increase in personal travel since the last
time the bugs were an issue, they spread faster than ever. Laundromats,
hotels, and libraries became ___________ for transmission. Bug eggs can
get tucked into suitcases when traveling, or into books that you check out
from the library. In communal living areas (like apartment buildings), they
can crawl from one apartment to another as they look for human hosts on
which to feed.

 5
Which choice completes the text with the most logical and precise word or
phrase?

        agents
        excursions
        hygienics
        meanderings

Studies show that younger children are much better suited to learn multiple
languages at one time, with the effects reaching from elevated attentiveness
to enhanced musical abilities. According to the Cornell Language
Acquisition Lab, elementary language learners are 70% more likely to reach
an intermediate level of communication compared to those who begin in
high school. The incorporation of multiple language study at an early age
creates more culturally aware students, but it results in more measurable
impacts as well: students who study language before the age of 10—when
brain capacity is at its highest—test better in all core subjects, including
English, Reading, and Math. Greater cognitive development encourages
exceptional creativity and divergent thinking.

 6
Which choice best states the main purpose of the text?

         To convince the reader to study a specific world language to
          become more culturally aware       To provide an evidence-based
          argument in favor of early learning of multiple languages     To
          suggest a curriculum for graduate-level studies in multiple
          language acquisition     To argue that the biological obstacles to
          learning language at an early age are difficult to overcome Text 1
Film star Charlie Chaplain was much more than a mere entertainer. In his
1939 film The Great Dictator, Chaplin delivers an impassioned speech in
which he condemns dictators, prejudice, and xenophobia. Knowing the
historical context, Chaplin was clearly making a commentary on Hitler,
Mussolini, and fascism. This speech is widely regarded as one of the most
powerful performances in film history, which is rather ironic—Chaplin was
famous as a silent film star, after all.

Text 2

Stephen Spielberg is a master of the close-up—nearly every Spielberg film
features an extended close-up on a wide-eyed, shocked face experiencing
awe or terror. Some critics find this technique manipulative, alleging that
this technique suggests that the audience should likewise respond with
shock or awe at the events onscreen, even if such a response has not been
emotionally “earned” by the scene. But what some call a cheap trick, others
call engaging cinema.

 7
Based on the texts, what would the “critics” in Text 2 most likely say about
Chaplin’s impassioned speech as described in Text 1?

          The emotional response it evokes is well earned.
          It is overly focused on political activism.
          Without a vocal accompaniment, a silent film cannot be poignant.
          Attempts to prompt a visceral reaction to what is on the screen are
           unwarranted.

The following text is from Willa Cather’s 1918 novel My Ántonia.

     When Jim was still an obscure young lawyer, struggling to make his
     way in New York, his career was suddenly advanced by a brilliant
     marriage. Genevieve Whitney was the only daughter of a distinguished
     man. Her marriage with young Burden was the subject of sharp
     comment at the time. It was said she had been brutally jilted by her
     cousin, Rutland Whitney, and that she married this unknown man from
     the West out of bravado. She was a restless, headstrong girl, even then,
     who liked to astonish her friends.

 8
Based on the text, the narrator likely believes that Jim married his wife

          out of a love for her intellect.
          because of professional ambition.
          due to his sincere love for her.
          given her sympathy for his poverty.

The following text is adapted from Octave Uzanne’s 1894 work “The End
of Books.” In this story, a group of gentlemen gathers after dinner to discuss
what they think the future holds. Eventually they come to the topic of the
future of books and the following monologue is given by one of the group.
     If by books you are to be understood as referring to our innumerable
     collections of paper, printed, sewed, and bound in a cover announcing
     the title of the work, I own to you frankly that I do not believe (and the
     progress of electricity and modern mechanism forbids me to believe)
     that Gutenberg’s invention can do otherwise than sooner or later fall
     into desuetude as a means of current interpretation of our mental
     products.
     Printing . . . which has changed the destiny of Europe, and which,
     especially during the last two centuries, has governed opinion through
     the book, the pamphlet, and the newspaper—printing, which since 1436
     has reigned despotically over the mind of man, is, in my opinion,
     threatened with death by the various devices for registering sound
     which have lately been invented, and which little by little will go to
     perfection.

 9
Based on the text, the narrator believes that the impact of printing on
history up to the time period when the article was written could be
described as      extremely significant.

          largely irrelevant.
          indisputably oppressive.
          uniformly militaristic.

Author Mary Shelly composed a novel called The Last Man in 1826. The
narrator of this story suggests that the greatest obstacle to his father’s
success is an inability to follow through on his commitments:
__________________

 10
Which quotation from The Last Man most effectively illustrates the claim?

          “During the short years of thoughtless youth, he was adored by the
           high-bred triflers of the day, nor least by the youthful sovereign.”
          “The fiend of gambling, which fully possessed [my father], made
           his good resolutions transient, his promises vain.”
          “With the quick sensibility peculiar to his temperament, he
           perceived his power in the brilliant circle to be on the wane.”
          “The king married; and the haughty princess of Austria, who
           became, as queen of England, the head of fashion, looked with
           harsh eyes on his defects, and with contempt on the affection her
           royal husband entertained for him.”




Source: www1.ncdc.noaa.gov/pub/data/cmb/images/tornado/clim/US_nationa_timeofday.png


                                       Figure 1
Source: www1.ncdc.noaa.gov/pub/data/cmb/images/tornado/clim/tornadoes_bymonth.png


                                       Figure 2
Meteorologists in the Northern Hemisphere hypothesize that by observing
the most common conditions in which a tornado might form, they can better
predict the likelihood of tornado creation. With this knowledge in place,
meteorologists can build public awareness about the increased possibility of
tornadoes during certain conditions, helping citizens become more aware of
potential danger. Given the meteorologists’ goal, they would be well-served
to inform the public that there is an increased likelihood of tornado
formation at _______________

 11
Which choice most effectively uses data from the table to complete the
statement?

          midday in the summer.
          nighttime in the fall.
          sunset in the springtime.
          sunrise in the winter.
“The Social Contract” is a 1763 treatise of political philosophy by Jean-
Jacques Rousseau. During the unsettled time in which the work was written,
Rousseau advocated social cohesion. In fact, the central tenet of the social
contract is that man must give himself entirely to the state to ensure social
order: ____________________

 12
Which quotation from “The Social Contract” most effectively illustrates the
claim?

        “Man was born free, but everywhere he is in chains. This man
         believes that he is the master of others, and still he is more of a
         slave than they are.”
        “This is the fundamental problem; the social contract offers a
         solution to it.”
        “And so it follows that each individual immediately recovers his
         primitive rights and natural liberties whenever any violation of the
         social contract occurs and thereby loses the contractual freedom
         for which he renounced them.”
        “The individual member alienates himself totally to the whole
         community together with all his rights.”
Freddie Mac, 30-Year Fixed Rate Mortgage Average in the United States [MORTGAGE30US],
retrieved from FRED, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis;
https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/MORTGAGE30US, June 22, 2021.


Economists have observed that during times of economic recession, central
banks tend to lower interest rates to help make the cost of having loans less
expensive. Since interest payments comprise a major component of any
loan, lowering interest rates will help consumers save money. If consumers
can save money on interest, they have more money available to purchase
goods and services, thereby stimulating the economy and helping the
country emerge successfully from a recession. Economists hypothesize that
in the relatively recent recession that started in early 2020, interest rates on
a variety of loan products would decrease:
___________________________

 13
Which choice most effectively uses data from the chart to support the
economists’ hypothesis?

          While the U.S. mortgage rate is relatively low by historical
          standards, it stayed fairly constant during the duration of the
          recession.
          The interest rate on U.S. 30-year fixed mortgages rose to as high as
           3.7% in the aftermath of the recession.
          U.S. 30-year fixed mortgage rates, for example, generally
           decreased throughout 2020 to a five year low of less than 3
           percent.
          Mortgage payments for the average American homebuyer
          increased in the immediate aftermath of the recent recession.

An area in southern Ohio has been undergoing construction for the past two
decades. New apartment complexes are replacing the forests that used to
cover that area. Surprisingly, researchers have found that a type of bird,
Species X, has been growing in population over that same period. Group 1
hypothesizes that the growth is due to detrimental environmental changes in
another area, causing Species X to move from their preferred area into
southern Ohio. Group 2 hypothesizes that the new landscape of southern
Ohio is more suitable for Species X, leading more of them to move into the
new area.

 14
Which finding, if true, would most directly support Group 2’s hypothesis?

        Areas in northern Ohio have undergone widespread tree clearing
         over the past two decades, making it necessary for Species X to
         find a new habitat.
        Species X preferred habitat is along the edges of tree lines, so with
         all the fragmentation of land, there are more edges.
        The number of natural predators of Species X in southern Ohio has
         increased in recent years due to reintroduction of some predators
         to the wild.
        Over the past two decades, there has been an increase in river-
         based pollutants throughout the southern Ohio region.

The mite reproductive process causes significant distress to bee colonies
since the mites themselves reproduce within a bee colony. The female mite
plants herself into the brood cells of the honeycomb where the queen has
laid an egg. The cell is then sealed as the egg hatches and the larva grows.
During that time, the female mite lays her eggs on the larva so that when
the new bee emerges from the cell to join the workforce, it already has
mites and is in a weakened state. Since worker bees and beekeepers alike
can’t see into the capped cell, no one knows how many of the capped cells
are infested, and once the cell is uncapped, several more mites can harm the
colony. This reproduction method makes the mites very difficult to get rid
of as, at any given time, _______________________

 15
Which choice most logically completes the text?
         the queen bee will have the resilience to overcome any infestation
          that manifests.
         the number of worker bees in a colony exceeds the number of
          drone bees.
         a beekeeper can utilize thermal imagery to detect the presence of
          mites in the cells.
         there are more mites breeding in capped cells that mite treatments
          may not reach.

Originating in13th-century Japan, haikus were originally used as openings
for longer poems called renga poems. But it wasn’t until Matsuo Bashō
redefined haiku poetry that it __________ what it is today.

 16
Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the conventions of
Standard English?

         becoming
         becomed
         became
         becomes

When taking out a loan, the fine print is key. It is important to understand
the differences between fixed _________ throughout the term of the loan,
and adjustable interest rates, which can change over time.

 17
Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the conventions of
Standard English?

         interest rates, that remain constant     interest rates, which remain
          constant       interest rates which remain constant      interest
          rates; remain constant After the varnish is removed, repair can
         finally begin. New varnish can be applied and, before it dries, new
         paint can be mixed into the varnish on damaged areas to replace
         damaged paint. This method ___________ for the old paint to be
         preserved under the varnish, but for the painting to have a “face
         lift” and look like new on the surface.

 18
Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the conventions of
Standard English?

        allowed
        would of allowed
        will have allowed
        allows

For most students, social media is just a part of life. ______________
inundated with pictures and videos from “influencers” who appear to live
lavish lifestyles and pay for it through sponsorships and ad revenues that
come from having a large social media following.

 19
Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the conventions of
Standard English?

        Regardless of what platform they’re on; they are      Regardless of
         what platform their on they are     Regardless of what platform
         they’re on, they are     Regardless, of what platform there on
         their The layperson merely associates Newton with gravity and
         laws of motion, and Einstein with relativity and mass-energy
         equivalence, failing to understand the magnitude of __________
         contribution.

 20
Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the conventions of
Standard English?

        either scientist’s
        either scientists’
        each scientists
        each scientists’

For the duration of the expedition, Commerson and Baret were aboard two
different ships called the Boudeuse and the Étoile. During their trip, they
went to the city of Montevideo, Uruguay; ____________________ and
New Ireland, in the present-day Papua New Guinea.

 21
Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the conventions of
Standard English?

        the city of Rio de Janeiro, Brazil     the city of Rio de Janeiro:
         Brazil      the city of Rio de Janeiro, Brazil;    the city, of Rio de
         Janeiro Brazil, Sweden’s aggressive new policies during the Great
         Depression came with a price tag, particularly from its massive
         investment in public works projects. ______ creating a large
         federal deficit, in 1934 Sweden became the first country to fully
         emerge from the Depression, and foreign creditors were quickly
         recompensed.

 22
Which choice completes the text with the most logical transition?

        Despite
        For
        By
        With
Humorism held medical discovery back for centuries at a time when the
pure sciences were preparing for a renaissance; it established a systemic
insularity in the field that cut medicine off from discoveries in biology,
chemistry, and physics, and generated a remarkably long-lived illusion of
comprehensiveness that categorically rejected revision and innovation.
_________ humorism was a far more persistent enemy of medical science
than was superstition because it wore the guise of naturalism.

 23
Which choice completes the text with the most logical transition?

        Somewhat
        In contrast,
        Further,
        Because of this,

When people understand the idea of time and diversification, they need one
final thing to help them be successful in the marketplace: a sense of calm.
Panic buying and selling is never a good idea. If an account was started
early and properly diversified, ______ severe market downturns should not
incite panic. Instead, clear-thinking investors will see that the market will
correct; rather than “selling low,” investors wait for the upswing (and
maybe longer) in order to see the payout on their investments.

 24
Which choice completes the text with the most logical transition?

        thus
        even
        so
        while

While conducting research, a student took these notes:
      In addition to the well-known IQ (Intelligence Quotient), people also
      have varying levels of EQ (Emotional Quotient), SQ (Social Quotient),
      and AQ (Adversity Quotient).
      People who develop IQ but not any emotional or social skills may
      struggle to succeed even if they are incredibly intelligent.
      AQ is a measure of how well people bounce back from adversarial
      events.
      A person without a degree of AQ may quickly give up in the face of
      adversity and may see failures as permanent situations instead of
      learning opportunities.
      Parents should work to ensure that a variety of skills, not just academic
      prowess, are developed in early childhood.

 25
The student wants to introduce the concept of AQ to an audience already
familiar with the concept of IQ. Which choice most effectively uses
relevant information from the notes to accomplish this goal?

         In contrast to IQ, AQ examines the personal characteristic most
          important to personal success.
         Unlike IQ, AQ is less focused on intelligence and more on
          personal grit when faced with adversity.
         While people can succeed without AQ, it is impossible to do so
         without IQ.
         Between IQ and AQ, AQ is more important to academic
          achievement.

While researching a topic, a student has taken the following notes:
    There are many high- and low-tech ways to implement sustainable
    agriculture.
    Stover mulching uses leftover plant material to regenerate the soil and
    reduce water run-off.
      Genome editing of plants like rice can increase the efficiency with
      which the plant uses nutrients in the soil.
      Silt traps prevent agricultural run-off from reaching vulnerable
      waterways.
      Companion planting involves planting mutually beneficial crops
      closely to increase their success.

 26
The student wants to suggest a low-tech way of implementing a sustainable
agricultural practice. Which choice most effectively uses relevant
information from the notes to accomplish this goal?

         Factory manufacturing of silt traps can prevent river pollution.
         When two companion plants are grown near one another, they both
         benefit.
         Scientists should utilize gene editing to decrease fertilizer waste.
         Stover mulch can potentially be turned into renewable biofuels for
          transportation.

While researching a topic, a student has taken the following notes:
      There are different ethical theories about how to determine the
      morality of different actions.
      Utilitarianism considers if the benefits of an action outweigh its costs
      —if they do, then the action is considered ethical.
      Some summarize the idea behind utilitarianism as “the ends justify the
      means.”
      Deontology is a competing ethical theory that considers actions to be
      ethical if they follow universal moral laws.
      Deontologists argue that people should follow ethical rules like “do not
      kill” or “do not steal,” even if the costs to humanity outweigh the
      benefits; they believe following duty is more important than a cost-
      benefit analysis.
 27
The student wants to give an example of an action that would be approved
by a utilitarian but disapproved by a deontologist. Which choice most
effectively uses relevant information from the notes to accomplish this
goal?

        A politician lies to secure higher office but implements helpful
         polices when elected.
        A teacher strongly penalizes cheating, making students less likely
         to collaborate.
        A mathematician makes a calculator error that results in a bridge
         collapsing.
        A computer programmer creates a new programming language to
         enable improved virtual reality.
Section 2, Module 1: Math
35 MINUTES, 22 QUESTIONS


DIRECTIONS

 All expressions and variables use real numbers.
 All figures are drawn to scale.
 Every figure lies in a plane.
 The domain of given functions is the set of all real numbers for which the corresponding value of
 the function is real.

For multiple-choice questions, solve the problem and pick the correct
answer from the provided choices. Each multiple-choice question has only
one correct answer.
For student-produced response questions, solve each problem and record
your answer following these guidelines:
 If you find more than one correct answer, enter just one answer.
 You can enter up to five characters for a positive answer and up to six characters (this includes the
 negative sign) for a negative answer.
 If your answer is a fraction that does not fit in the given space, enter the decimal equivalent
 instead.
 If your answer is a decimal that does not fit in the given space, enter it by stopping at or rounding
 up at the fourth digit.
 If your answer is a mixed number (like       ), enter it as an improper fraction (9/2) or its decimal
 equivalent (4.5).
 Do not enter symbols like a comma, dollar sign, or percent sign.




                                         Examples

            Answer                   Acceptable Entries               Unacceptable Entries
                                                                       That Will Receive
                                                                          Zero Credit
                4.5                               4.5
                                                 4.50
                                                                         41/2
                                                 9/2
                                                 8/9                     0.88
                                                .8888                     .88
                                                .8889                     .89
                                                0.888                    0.89
                                                0.889
                                                 −1/9                    −.11
                                                −.1111                   −0.11
                                                −0.111

REFERENCE




The number of degrees of arc in a circle is 360.
The number of radians of arc in a circle is 2π.
The sum of the measures in degrees of the angles of a triangle is 180.
 1
If x = 5, what is 3(x + 2) − 2x?

         5
         9
         11
         13

 2
−3(x2 − 2x + 4) is equivalent to which of the following expressions?

         −3x2 − 6x + 12
         −3x2 − 6x − 12
         −3x2 − 6x + 12
         −3x2 + 6x − 12

 3


                                        Percentage of Students with That
              Letter Grade                           Grade
               A (90–100%)                                26
                B (80–99%)                                33
                C (70–79%)                                21
                D (60–69%)                                13
                 F (<60%)                                 7



The table above presents the percentage of students in a class with
particular letter grades. What letter grade is the median grade for the class?

         A      B
         C
        D

 4




What is the slope of the line in the above graph in the xy-coordinate plane?




 5
What is the product of the solutions to the equation
 6
At a certain college, 27% of all students majored in science or mathematics.
If there were a total of 4,000 students at the college, how many of the
students would have a science or mathematics major?

        1,080
        2,920
        14,815
        108,000

 7
Mark consistently sleeps for 8 hours per day. Which expression gives the
number of hours that Mark would sleep in W weeks?

        56 × W
        8×W
        8+W
        56 + W

 8
If       what is the value of x?
 9

                                 B = 2P + 3E
A bagel store charges $2 for each plain bagel, P, and $3 for each everything
bagel, E. The equation above represents the total amount, B, that Samantha
paid for a box of bagels. If the box cost a total of $40 and Samantha
purchased 4 everything bagels, how many plain bagels did she purchase?




 10
A circle with an original area of 16π units increases in area by 56.25%.
What is the radius of the new circle?

         5 units    6 units     10 units     25 units 11




Given that (x, y) is a solution to the above system of equations, what is the
value of x?




 12
If the city of Detroit has a population of 4,900 persons per square mile, and
there are 139 square miles of land within the city, what would most closely
approximate the total population of the city?
        35,000
        47,000
        681,000
        1,240,000

 13
If          and x − 2 = 3, what is the value of x + 2?




 14




The height in inches and weight in pounds for several female orangutans is
graphed in the scatterplot above. Based on the data in the graph, which of
these statements best summarizes the overall trend in the data?
         The greater the height of the orangutan, the greater the weight.
         The lower the height of the orangutan, the greater the weight.
         The greater the height of the orangutan, the lower the weight.
         The height and the weight of the orangutan are equivalent
          throughout the set of data.

 15
A cylindrical tank has base with a diameter of 10 feet and a volume of 300π
cubic feet. What is the height of this tank in feet?

         8
         10
         12
         16

 16
If the function             when x ≠ 0, what is the value of f(6)?




         1



 17
After a presidential debate, viewers could go to an online poll and vote for
which of the two candidates they thought won the debate. Approximately
2,500 viewers chose to fill out responses. Would the results from the online
poll provide an accurate representation of opinions of all likely voters as to
whom they thought won the debate?

         Yes, because the sample of viewers was random.
         Yes, because the number of respondents was sufficiently large.
         No, because the respondents were self-selected instead of
          randomly selected.
         No, because the number of respondents was insufficient.

 18

                      x                                    y
                      2                                    5
                      6                                   15
                   10                                     25



The relationship between the values in the table above can be expressed as
the function y = kx, in which k is a constant value. What is the value of k?




 19
In the xy-plane, which of these equations would represent the graph of y =
x2 − 4 shifted upward five units?

         y = x2 − 5
         y = x2 − 1
         y = x2 + 1
         y = 5 x2 − 4

 20

                                   y≥x+n
When the ordered pair (2, 5) is a solution for (x, y) in the inequality above,
what is the greatest possible value for n?
          3
          5
          8
          12

 21


                                Actually Has          Actually Does Not
                                   Illness              Have Illness
 Positive Test Result                 5                        20

 Negative Test Result                 0                       800



If a randomly selected patient who participated in the study with the results
given above has a positive test result (i.e., the test indicates that someone
has an illness), what is the probability that the result is a false positive?

          0.5
          0.8
          0.9
          1.2

 22
Triangles ABC and DEF both have sides of length 6 and 7 as shown above.
Which of the following would, if true, be sufficient to prove that the
triangles are congruent?

        That angle BAC equals angle DEF
        That angle CBA equals angle EDF
        That angle BAC equals angle DFE
        That angle ABC equals angle FED
Section 2, Module 2: Math
35 MINUTES, 22 QUESTIONS


DIRECTIONS

 All expressions and variables use real numbers.
 All figures are drawn to scale.
 Every figure lies in a plane.
 The domain of given functions is the set of all real numbers for which the corresponding value of
 the function is real.
   For multiple-choice questions, solve the problem and pick the correct answer from the provided
   choices. Each multiple-choice question has only one correct answer.
   For student-produced response questions, solve each problem and record your answer
   following these guidelines:

 If you find more than one correct answer, enter just one answer.
 You can enter up to five characters for a positive answer and up to six characters (this includes the
 negative sign) for a negative answer.
 If your answer is a fraction that does not fit in the given space, enter the decimal equivalent
 instead.
 If your answer is a decimal that does not fit in the given space, enter it by stopping at or rounding
 up at the fourth digit.
 If your answer is a mixed number (like       ), enter it as an improper fraction (9/2) or its decimal
 equivalent (4.5).
 Do not enter symbols like a comma, dollar sign, or percent sign.




                                         Examples

            Answer                   Acceptable Entries               Unacceptable Entries
                                                                       That Will Receive
                                                                          Zero Credit
                4.5                               4.5
                                                 4.50
                                                 9/2                     41/2
                                                 8/9                     0.88
                                                .8888                     .88
                                                .8889                     .89
                                                0.888                    0.89
                                                0.889
                                                 −1/9                    −.11
                                                −.1111                   −0.11
                                                −0.111


REFERENCE




The number of degrees of arc in a circle is 360.
The number of radians of arc in a circle is 2π.
The sum of the measures in degrees of the angles of a triangle is 180.




 1
If 5x + 2 = 4(x − 3), what is the value of x?

         − 14
         − 11
         −7
         3

 2




Tyrese takes a walk around his neighborhood. The distance he is in miles
from his house at a particular number of minutes after beginning his walk is
represented in the graph above. At what interval of time in his walk did the
distance he is from his house decrease most rapidly?

         0–5 minutes       15–20 minutes        25–30 minutes   30–35
          minutes 3
If              and x = 5, what is the value of y?
 4
If a line has a slope of 5 and a y-intercept of k, what is the value of k if the
points (1, 8) and (3, 18) are in the line?

         3
         5
         9
         24

 5




Which of the following is equivalent to the above expression, in which x ≠
3?

         x2 − 2
         x3 − 1
         x−9
         x+3

 6




How many units is the perimeter of the above trapezoid?
 7
A fruit stand charges a different amount depending on the number of pieces
of fruit in a box:


  Number of Pieces of Fruit in the
               Box                                  Cost of Box
                   6                                    $13.40
                  12                                    $25.40
                  20                                    $41.40
                  32                                    $65.40



What function could be used to determine the total cost, C, of a box that has
x pieces of fruit?

        C(x) = − x + 2.40
        C(x) = 2x + 1.40
        C(x) = 1.4x + 3
        C(x) = 2.8x + 1

 8
Kinetic energy, K, is calculated using the following formula, in which m =
mass, and v = velocity.




What is the velocity in terms of the other variables?
         v = 2Km




 9
A data set of 15 different numbers has a median of 25 and a mean of 30. If
the smallest member of the set has 5 subtracted from it and the largest
member has 20 added to it, while all the other elements remain the same,
which of these is a correct statement?

         The standard deviation of the set changes more than the range of
          the set    The range of the set changes more than the standard
          deviation of the set.
         The range of the set remains the same.
         The standard deviation of the set remains the same.

 10
Consider the sum of the expressions −x2 + 4x − 3 and 5x2 − 2x + 8. If the
sum is written in the form gx2 + hx + k, where g, h, and k are constants,
what is the value of k?

         1
         3
         4
         5

 11
In the xy-plane, a line passes through the points (5, 0) and (0, 3). Another
line is perpendicular to this line. What would be this perpendicular line’s
slope?
 12




Triangle EFG is equilateral. If   is 10 units long, and ∠EFZ is 30°, what
is the length of ?




        10


 13
A particular multivitamin provides 300 mg of calcium, giving 23% of the
recommended daily value of calcium for an adult. If another multivitamin
provides 210 mg of calcium, approximately what percentage of a
recommended daily value of calcium for an adult would it provide, to the
nearest whole percent?

        8%
        16%
        20%
        44%
 14
The measure of an angle is π radians. How many angles of this measure
would be equivalent to 360 degrees?




 15
For the system of inequalities y ≤ x + 2 and y ≤ − x + 4, when y is at its
greatest possible value, what is the corresponding value of x?

         −6
         −2
         1
         4

 16




Which function expresses the relationship between x and y?
 17
What is the result when 4x2 − 3x + 2 is divided by x − 3?

        4x − 9
        12x2 + 9




 18

                           y = x(x − 4)2 (x + 3)2
In the above equation, how many unique x-intercepts does the graph of the
function have?

        0
        1
        3
        5

 19
Consider the information in the table above with the variables representing
numerical values. There are twice as many elementary school students as
there are middle school students, and 60% of elementary school students
take the bus. How many middle school students walk to school?

         20
         30
         40
         60

 20
What values of x would make the product of       and         undefined?

         0 only     − 1 only      0 and 1 only      − 1 and 0 only 21
For a parabola with the equation y = 7(x − 5)(x + 2), what is the distance
between the x intercepts of the parabola?




 22
If (x + 5)(x + 3) = a x2 + bx + c, in which a, b, and c are all constants, what
is the value of c?
                           ANSWER KEY
                               Practice Test 1

Section 1, Module 1: Reading and Writing
 1.   D
 2.   C
 3.   B
 4.   C
 5.   D
 6.   C
 7.   B
 8.   B
 9.   D
10. B
11. C
12. D
13. B
14. D
15. C
16. A 17. D
18. D
19. A 20. B
21. C
22. C
23. A 24. D
25. A 26. C
27. B

Section 1, Module 2: Reading and Writing
 1.   D
 2.   A 3. C
 4.   B
 5.   A 6. B
 7.   A 8. B
 9.   A 10. B
11. C
12. D
13. C
14. B
15. D
16. C
17. B
18. D
19. C
20. A 21. C
22. A 23. C
24. B
25. B
26. B
27. A

Section 2, Module 1: Math
 1. C
 2. D
 3.   B
 4.   B
 5.   B
 6.   A 7. A 8. C
 9.   14
10. A 11. 6
12. C
13. 7
14. A 15. C
16. D
17. C
18. 2.5 or
19. C
20. A 21. B
22. C

Section 2, Module 2: Math
 1.   A 2. D
 3.   1
 4.   A 5. D
 6.   44
 7.   B
 8.   B
 9.   B
10. D
11. 1.666, 1.667, or
12. A 13. B
14. 3
15. C
16. A 17. D
18. C
19. B
20. C
21. 7
22. 15
Digital SAT Scoring Chart
This will give you an approximation of the score you would earn on the
Digital SAT.1 Tally the number of correct answers from the Reading and
Writing section (out of 54) and the Math section (out of 44). Take the total
for each of these and find the corresponding section score in the tables
below.


 Number of Correct Reading and           Reading and Writing Test Score
  Writing Questions (Out of 54)                   (Out of 800)
                   0                                     200
                   1                                     210
                   2                                     220
                   3                                     230
                   4                                     240
                   5                                     250
                   6                                     260
                   7                                     270
                   8                                     280
                   9                                     290
                  10                                     300
                  11                                     310
                  12                                     330
                  13                                     340
                  14                                     350
                  15                                     360
                  16                                     380
                  17                                     390
                  18                                     400
                  19                                     410
                  20                                     430
Number of Correct Reading and    Reading and Writing Test Score
 Writing Questions (Out of 54)            (Out of 800)
              21                              440
              22                              460
              23                              470
              24                              490
              25                              500
              26                              510
              27                              520
              28                              530
              29                              540
              30                              550
              31                              560
              32                              570
              33                              580
              34                              590
              35                              600
              36                              610
              37                              620
              38                              630
              39                              640
              40                              650
              41                              660
              42                              670
              43                              680
              44                              690
              45                              700
              46                              710
              47                              720
              48                              730
              49                              740
  Number of Correct Reading and                       Reading and Writing Test Score
   Writing Questions (Out of 54)                               (Out of 800)
                        50                                                 750
                        51                                                 760
                        52                                                 770
                        53                                                 790
                        54                                                 800




1 Keep in mind that some of the questions on an actual SAT test will be research questions that will
not count towards your actual score. For the sake of simplicity, we are including possible research
questions in your calculation.



       Number of Correct Math                        Math Section Score (Out of 800)
        Questions (Out of 44)
                         0                                                 200
                         1                                                 220
                         2                                                 230
                         3                                                 240
                         4                                                 250
                         5                                                 280
                         6                                                 300
                         7                                                 320
                         8                                                 340
                         9                                                 350
                        10                                                 360
                        11                                                 380
                        12                                                 390
                        13                                                 400
                        14                                                 410
                        15                                                 430
Number of Correct Math   Math Section Score (Out of 800)
 Questions (Out of 44)
          16                           440
          17                           450
          18                           460
          19                           480
          20                           490
          21                           500
          22                           510
          23                           520
          24                           530
          25                           540
          26                           550
          27                           560
          28                           570
          29                           580
          30                           590
          31                           600
          32                           610
          33                           620
          34                           630
          35                           650
          36                           660
          37                           680
          38                           690
          39                           700
          40                           720
          41                           750
          42                           770
          43                           790
          44                           800
Add the Reading and Writing section score and the Math section score to
find your total SAT test score: _____________ Reading and Writing
Section Score +

_____________ Math Section Score =

_____________ Total SAT Test Score (between 400 and 1600)
Approximate your testing percentiles (1st to 99th) using this chart:2




2 Scoring Data based on information at collegeboard.org
Answer Explanations
Section 1, Module 1: Reading and Writing
 1. (D) “To call it a day” means to give up working. The boss in this text
    acknowledges that work is too difficult under the conditions, so it
    would be logical for him to suggest that everyone give up working. It
    is not choice (A) or (B) because continuing the work under these
    circumstances would not be advisable. It is not (C) because the focus
    is on work not pleasure.
 2. (C) In this context, “reservations” means “doubts.” This would be
    logical given that the two people had not gotten along very well the
    last time they hung out. It is not choice (A) because to detain someone
    is to hold them as a prisoner, which is not logical here. Choice (B)
    does not make sense because someone would not have land or
    “territories” when thinking about an invitation. It is not (D) because
    this is the opposite of the needed meaning.
 3. (B) While all of the choices are in some way related to money or
    business, only “compensation” makes sense in terms of referring to
    the likely salaries that engineers could receive. “Expenditures” refers
    to general spending, “enterprises” refers to business activities, and
    “reimbursement” refers to receiving a refund for one’s paid expenses.
 4. (C) Later in the sentence with the underlined portion, the narrator
    states that the crash test dummy only represents the “smallest 5
    percent of women,” indicating that it is a smaller size. To say
    something is “scaled down” means that it is made to be smaller,
    making choice (C) the most logical option. It is not choice (A) or (B)
    because these would show that the model is increased in size. It is not
    (D) because this word means to shorten a non-physical object, like
    time or a word.
 5. (D) The sentence is focused on scientific measurement, so
    “objectively” would be most appropriate. The other options would not
   be used to describe high-quality scientific measurement, but would
   instead apply to human emotions.
6. (C) This sentence provides a statistic and other context intended to
   show that advertising is pervasive, so choice (C) is correct. The other
   options don’t consider the context prior to the sentence in which the
   author tries to persuade the reader that advertising is effective despite
   common opinion that one is immune to influence.
7. (B) The final line makes the comparison made throughout the poem
   most clear in that just as the United States now spans toward the
   Western Sea, so will the narrator’s love. It is not choice (A) because
   the narrator does not indicate that he intends to lead the country. It is
   not (C) because the economic features of the states are not compared.
   It is not (D) because no direct allusion is made to the need for national
   harmony and a bloody conflict.
8. (B) Amory’s relationship with his mother can be best seen through
   their dialogue. Amory’s use of his mother’s first name indicates that
   their affiliation is familiar, while her anxiety over him rising too early
   shows that it is a kindly relationship. So, choice (B) works best here,
   in which “friendly” refers to “approachable and informal.” Using his
   mother’s first name is far from traditional, as in choice (A). Since the
   mother finds it agreeable, there is no evidence that Amory is
   disrespectful as in (C). Choice (D) can be tempting because Amory
   not only uses Beatrice’s first name in addressing her, but the narrator
   also tells us that Amory holds no illusions about his vain mother.
   However, “cold” and “distant” are too negative.
9. (D) This option most directly shows that the narrator wishes to reunify
   with her departed husband, since she states that if he is coming, he
   should be sure to let her know ahead of time so that she can meet him.
   Choice (A) focuses on the narrator’s appearance and outdoor actions.
   Choice (B) would show that the narrator was not especially eager for
   a reunification. Choice (C) does not express emotion about missing
   the husband, but just states information about his journey.
10. (B) The final sentence of the text is providing an example to elaborate
     on the claim made in the previous sentence, which is that crops can
     aid the crop rotation process by either fixing or removing nitrogen.
     Since the text indicates that a legume is a nitrogen-fixing plant, the
     example would be completed by presenting a crop that would remove
     nitrogen from the soil—choice (B) is the best option since corn silage
     has the highest rate of nitrogen removal of any of the crops in the
     table. It is not choice (A) because barley has the lowest rate of
     nitrogen removal. It is not choice (C) or (D) since these incorrectly
     suggest that something with a low rate of nitrogen removal would be
     needed.
11. (C) The author makes an anecdotal argument in favor of lawsuit
     reform in this paragraph—the argument would be bolstered by using
     concrete statistics in support. Choice (C) would provide direct
     statistical support to make the case that implementing tort reform
     would result in businesses relocating to more tort-friendly locations. It
     is not choice (A) because this does not connect to tort reform. It is not
     choice (B) because this would undermine the author’s argument,
     showing that having a greater possibility of lawsuit payouts would
     lead to greater social happiness. It is not choice (D) because this gives
     a reason unrelated to tort reform for business relocation.
12. (D) In these lines, our narrator voices his discontent with the
     requirements of school and his attention toward other “wild
     sensations,” supporting the idea that his interest toward his studies is
     only half-hearted. Choices (A), (B), and (C) are incorrect because
     they do not provide evidence of the character’s attitude toward
     following and participating in school requirements.
13. (B) The final sentence of the text starts by giving information that
     would seem to indicate that polar bears may be at risk for heart
     problems given their high bodily fat content and cholesterol levels.
     The transition “even so” shows that what follows in the sentence
     should contrast with what comes before. Choice (B) is the most
     logical option since it states that polar bears are in fact not at risk for
     heart attacks. Choice (A) does not provide a contrast, and choices (C)
     and (D) would be in agreement with the first part of the sentence
     instead of showing a contrast with it.
14. (D) Since the text states that Mendeleev’s predictions cause the
     popularity of his theory to skyrocket, it makes sense that the periodic
     table would become extremely popular, making choice (D) the most
     logical option. It is not choice (A) because it would not make sense to
     state that Mendeleev received only a limited degree of credit because
     his theory skyrocketed in popularity. It is not choice (B) because these
     fields would not directly relate to chemistry. It is not choice (C)
     because Mendeleev had outlets in chemistry years before the periodic
     table became quite popular.
15. (C) Choice (C) properly uses parentheses to set aside the parenthetical
     phrase that describes what a baffle is. Choice (A) does not have an
     independent clause after the semicolon. Choice (B) incorrectly inserts
     a dash, which provides an unnecessary interruption. Choice (D) is too
     choppy with an unnecessary comma after “device.”
16. (A) “Someone else” is a singular subject that agrees with the singular
     verb “has.” All the other verbs are plural.
17. (D) Choice (D) puts the words in the most logical order, starting with a
     verb and then using the idiom “a bit out of style.” The other options
     have illogical word order.
18. (D) “Help” would match both the plural subject of “professionals” and
     the present tense of the sentence as indicated by the verb “allow.”
     Choice (A) is a singular verb, and (B) and (C) are not present tense
     plural verbs.
19. (A) Choice (A) uses the apostrophe to show that the singular serval
     possesses its diet. “Serval” must be singular since the word “a”
     precedes it. Choice (B) does not show possession, and (C) and (D)
     inappropriately use plural apostrophes on servals’ and diets’
     respectively.
20. (B) The verb refers to the plural “states” and so requires a plural verb
     —“become.” Also, the tense of the other verbs in the sentence is
     present, so “become” makes sense because it is also in the present
     tense. Choice (A) is singular, and (C) and (D) use incorrect verb tense.
21. (C) No punctuation is needed to break up this sentence. Choice (A) is
     incorrect since there is not a complete sentence after the semicolon.
     Choice (B) incorrectly breaks up a two-part list with a comma. Choice
     (D) incorrectly inserts a parenthetical phrase.
22. (C) Choice (C) appropriately uses dashes to set aside the parenthetical
     phrase that clarifies what the two things are. Choice (A) has an
     unnecessary comma after the parentheses—the parentheses would be
     sufficient by themselves to set this phrase off to the side. Choice (B)
     does not have a comma before the parenthetical phrase, and (D) uses
     inconsistent punctuation around the parenthetical phrase.
23. (A) “Whereas” is the only option that provides a contrast within the
     sentence between the ideas that a resume should be concise and that
     an online profile can be more thorough.
24. (D) “Hence” is the only option to indicate a cause-and-effect
     relationship between the fact that the housing market is challenging
     with its cost and unpredictability and the fact that as a result, many
     working-class families will face further financial instability.
25. (A) Choice (A) best emphasizes the physical demands of being a
     Gyoja monk since it states that they walk an incredible 52 miles a day
     with very little food and sleep. While choice (B) also refers to the
     physical demands, 25 miles a day is not as rigorous as 52 miles a day.
     Choices (C) and (D) do not focus on the physical demands of
     becoming Gyoja monks, instead focusing on the time and spiritual
     commitment involved.
26. (C) Choice (C) succeeds in making a generalization about the makeup
     of typical furniture since it states that the springs in the everyday
     furniture are more likely to be sinuous than coil, which is consistent
     with the notes. It is not choice (A) because this is the opposite of what
     the notes indicate. It is not choice (B) because the labor-intensive
     process only applies to coil springs as described in the notes. It is not
     choice (D) because the notes indicate that sinuous springs are more
     common, not that the springs are equally likely to be found.
27. (B) According to the notes, the wind speeds offshore “tend to be
     higher than on land,” making choice (B) a logical reason why having
     an offshore wind farm could be better than a land-based one. It is not
     choice (A) because both offshore and land-based wind farms would
     provide renewable energy. It is not choice (C) because this is an
     argument in favor of land-based wind farms. It is not choice (D)
     because it points out a cost drawback of offshore wind farms.

Section 1, Module 2: Reading and Writing
 1. (D) The author uses an idiom in an ironic way, stating that despite a
    lack of common understanding, chemistry is extremely applicable to
    cooking, implying that this is something to think about. Choice (A)
    incorrectly understands it as stimulating one’s appetite. Choices (B)
    and (C) inaccurately assume action rather than contemplation.
 2. (A) “Drawback” is another way of stating that something is a
    shortcoming or problem. The narrator is discussing the problems with
    the ABC-X model, so “drawback” would make sense to introduce a
    sentence that describes another problem with this theory. It is not
    “assessment” or “rumination” as the narrator already has a negative
    opinion on the theory. It is not “trauma” because this is too negative.
 3. (C) To “assure” is to remove doubt, and it is generally done to another
    person. I assured my father that I would be home by curfew. To
    “ensure” means to make sure a thing will or won’t happen. I studied
    last night to ensure that I wouldn’t fail the test. To “insure” refers to
    car insurance, life insurance, health insurance, etc. To “reassure” is
    simply to “assure” someone multiple times. In this sentence, the
    classrooms are ensuring that something will happen—students will be
    prepared for the next grade. Choice (C) is the correct answer.
 4. (B) The narrator is drawing a contrast between something that may
    appear to be “trivial” while in actuality turning out to be significant—
    therefore, “substantive” makes the most sense because it means that
   whatever is being evaluated has substance. Choices (A) and (C) are
   overly negative, while “exuberant” does not draw a logical contrast
   with “trivial.”
5. (A) The text asserts that certain things help cause the spread of
   bedbugs, making “agent” an appropriate word since in one of the less
   common definitions of “agent,” it can mean something that helps
   bring about a specific effect. It is not “excursions” or “meanderings”
   since these buildings do not travel anywhere. It is not “hygienics”
   because the buildings are not sanitary.
6. (B) The text begins by stating that since young children are better
   suited to learning multiple languages, they can benefit from a wide
   range of positive effects. The text goes on to highlight some of these
   effects, such as increased cultural awareness and overall improvement
   in academic skill. Thus, choice (B) makes the most sense because the
   text provides evidence in favor of early learning of multiple
   languages. It is not choice (A) because the narrator does not argue that
   a specific language should be learned; rather, the narrator argues that
   multiple language learning in general is beneficial. It is not (C)
   because no specific curriculum is suggested. It is not (D) because the
   narrator argues that biological obstacles to early language learning are
   minimized if the language is learned earlier in life.
7. (A) The second text suggests that some emotional responses that
   Spielberg tries to evoke in his films may not always be “earned”
   because they are prompted by watching the character reactions instead
   of considering the content of what happened. The example in Text 1
   has quite a bit of intellectual activity behind it, implying that an
   emotional response to this speech is based on something substantive
   instead of something manipulative. It is not choice (B) because the
   author of Text 2 does not express a concern with political activism. It
   is not choice (C) because the author of Text 2 clearly believes that
   emotion can be prompted by the expressions that actors have on the
   screen. It is not (D) because the author of Text 2 implies that some
   emotional responses can be earned.
 8. (B) The text tells us that Jim was struggling to make it in New York.
    Then, he had a “brilliant marriage.” The connection to “the daughter
    of a distinguished man” helped Jim advance in life. The implication,
    then, is that Jim married his wife for her connections. Additionally,
    the marriage between them prompted “sharp comment” at the time,
    suggesting that the motives for the marriage were considered
    suspicious. This makes choice (B) the best answer—the narrator
    believes Jim married his wife to advance his career. Choices (A) and
    (C) are incorrect as there is no evidence that Jim and his wife share
    any love. (D) is incorrect as we have no evidence that his wife
    sympathized with his poverty.
 9. (A) In the second paragraph, the author describes the tremendous
    impact that printing has had on human history, saying that it “changed
    the destiny of Europe,” and that it has “governed opinion,” reigning
    over the mind of man. So, this influence can best be described as
    “extremely significant.” It is not choice (B) because the influence of
    printing is relevant, not irrelevant. It is not (C) because the author
    suggests that printing has had a widespread influence, not that it has
    had a serious negative impact on society. It is not (D) because the
    impact of printing is more cultural, not militaristic.
10. (B) This option shows that the speaker believes that the “fiend of
     gambling” has made his father’s “good resolutions transient, his
     promises vain,” showing that he has an inability to follow through on
     his commitments. This is a great obstacle to the narrator’s father since
     it has “fully possessed him.” Choice (A) describes the father’s early
     adulthood but does not indicate that it is a great obstacle. Choices (C)
     and (D) show a single obstacle his father faced (the declining favor of
     the king) but do not indicate that this was a large overall issue in his
     life.
11. (C) We can see in Figure 1 that the evening hours have the highest
     normalized occurrence rates of any time of day. We also see that in
     Figure 2, the Northern Hemispheric spring months of April, May, and
     June have the highest rate of tornado formation. Combined, this
     makes the evening hours in the spring the most likely time for a
     tornado to form. Choice (C) is the best option. The other options all
     have a lower likelihood of spawning a tornado.
12. (D) To give oneself entirely to the state means that someone would
     give up their personal ambitions and desires so that the society as a
     whole can benefit. Choice (D) most directly illustrates this since the
     individual would “alienate” himself to the whole community, giving
     up his rights. Choices (A) and (B) do not address the individual
     sacrifice of rights. It is not (C) because this suggests an opportunity
     for individuals to recover their rights should the social contract be
     violated.
13. (C) The economists hypothesize that if we look at the months after
     2020, interest rates should decrease. Choice (C) correctly points out
     that mortgage rates generally decreased during this time period,
     providing an example in support of the claim. Choice (A) would not
     show a decrease. Choices (B) and (D) would show the opposite of
     what would support the hypothesis.
14. (B) Group 2 argues that the reason why Species X has been growing in
     population despite a loss of habitat is that the landscape has become
     more suitable for the bird. Choice (B) would directly support this idea
     because if there is more construction taking place, it stands to reason
     that there might be more fragmentation of land creating more edges
     along tree lines that the birds might prefer. It is not choice (A) because
     this does not show why south Ohio would be a good choice for the
     birds. It is not (B) because an increase in predators would likely kill
     some of the birds, making the habitat less desirable. Also, choice (D)
     is incorrect because having more pollution in southern Ohio would be
     likely be detrimental to the birds.
15. (D) The text states that the bees cannot see into the capped cell, so
     they do not know if mites are growing inside the cells. Thus, choice
     (D) makes the most sense because it underscores how there are mites
     breeding that the treatments may not reach because they are inside the
     capped cells. It is not choice (A) or (C) because these options would
     instead show that the mites could be gotten rid of. It is not (B)
     because this would not be directly relevant to the claim made in the
     final sentence of the text.
16. (C) “Became” is consistent with the past tense seen in surrounding
     verbs, like “wasn’t,” “used,” and “called.” The other options are not in
     the proper conjugation for past tense.
17. (B) “Which” is used to set aside a nonessential description, while
     “that” is used at the beginning of an essential description. In this case,
     the clarification about the constancy of interest rates could be
     removed from the sentence and the sentence would still be logical.
     Therefore, surrounding the description of the fixed interest rates with
     commas make sense. It is not choice (A) because this is a nonessential
     description, and commas typically do not precede the word “that”. It
     is not (C) because there is no pause before “which.” It is not (D)
     because there is not a complete sentence after the semicolon.
18. (D) The surrounding sentences use verbs that are in the present tense,
     like “can” and “have.” So, “allows” is both consistent with the present
     tense and the singular subject of “method.” The other options are not
     in the present tense.
19. (C) This option uses the correct form of “they’re,” which means “they
     are.” Also, it puts a comma after the dependent clause that introduces
     the sentence. Choices (B) and (D) use “their” and “there,” which are
     incorrect in this context. Choice (A) incorrectly uses a semicolon to
     provide a break after a dependent clause—there needs to be an
     independent clause on either side of the semicolon when it is used to
     break up sentences.
20. (A) This needs a possessive to match the idea: the contribution of
     either scientist. As possession and an apostrophe are required,
     eliminate choice (C). Eliminate choices (B) and (D) for using the
     plural word “scientists” since the initial idea was the contribution of
     either scientist, not the contribution of both scientists.
21. (C) Choice (C) is the only option that correctly uses the comma and
     semicolon to indicate that this is part of a list—the items within the
     list have commas within them (separating each city name and country
     name/description), so semicolons are logically used to separate items
     in this list.
22. (A) The text begins by stating that Sweden had to spend quite a bit of
     money during the Great Depression, which would make it
     understandable if Sweden had not been able to repay its debts. The
     text goes on to state that Sweden quickly paid back its creditors,
     making a contrast to introduce the second sentence necessary.
     “Despite” is the only option that expresses a contrast.
23. (C) “Further” correctly indicates that what follows in this sentence
     will build upon the argument already presented. Choice (A) does not
     make a strong tie to the argument, (B) shows contrast, and (D) shows
     cause and effect.
24. (B) “Even” in this context is used to emphasize that severe market
     downturns should not incite panic. (A) causal link is already
     established with the “if” at the beginning of the sentence, making
     “thus” and “so” unnecessary. It is not “while” because there is not a
     contrast.
25. (B) If an audience is already familiar with the concept of IQ, they will
     know that IQ is associated with intelligence. Choice (B) builds off this
     understanding by drawing a contrast between AQ and IQ. It is not
     choice (A) because the notes indicate that AQ is an important
     component to success but does not indicate that it is the most
     important component. It is not choice (C) because the text does not
     suggest that IQ is totally unimportant to success. It is not (D) because
     the last bullet point implies that AQ is not necessarily key to academic
     prowess.
26. (B) While there are many ways that sustainable agriculture could be
     implemented, the student wishes to suggest a way of doing so that
     does not involve much technology. The last bullet point suggests that
     simply planting crops close to each other will increase their success,
     making (B) the most logical answer. The other options all involve
     more high-tech ways of implementing sustainable agricultural
     practices.
27. (A) According to the notes, a utilitarian looks at the outcomes of an
     action to determine if it is ethical, while a deontologist looks at
     whether the action was carried out in a rule-based way. Choice (A) is
     a good example of something that would be approved of by a
     utilitarian but not a deontologist: the politician is violating a rule
     against lying, but while in office the politician carries out policies that
     serve the greater good. It is not choice (B) because a utilitarian would
     not like the resulting lack of collaboration among the students. It is
     not choice (C) because a utilitarian would not appreciate the outcome
     of a collapsed bridge. It is not choice (D) because it is not clear
     whether any ethical rules would be violated in this action, making it
     uncertain as to whether a deontologist would disapprove.

Section 2, Module 1: Math
 1. (C) Plug 5 in for x into the expression to find its value:




 2. (D)




 3. (B) The total number of students in the class is 26 + 33 + 21 + 13 + 7
    = 100. So, the median grade will be the average of the 50th and 51st
    term. The 50th and 51st terms, when the grades are put in order from
    least to greatest, are both (B). So, the median grade for the class is
    (B).
 4. (B)
   Take the change in y divided by the change in x to find the slope of
   the line. Use the points      and       , and the formula slope =




5. (B) The equation is already in a factored form that allows you to
   identify the solutions. If x is     , the value of the right-hand side of
   the equation would be zero. Therefore, these two numbers are
   solutions. So, multiply them together to find the product:




6. (A) Find 27% of 4,000 to see how many of the students would have a
   science or math major. Move the decimal point of 27 to the left two
   spots, then multiply this by 4,000 to find the number of students:
 7. (A) There are 7 days in one week, so multiply the 8 hours Mark sleeps
    per day by 7 to find out the total number of hours he sleeps in a week:
    7 × 8 = 56. Then, multiply 56 by the number of weeks, W, to find the
    number of hours that Mark would sleep in W weeks: 56 × W.
 8. (C) Take the cube root of both sides of the equation to solve for x:




     If       , what is the value of x?
 9. (14) Plug 40 in for B and 4 in for E. Then solve for P:




10. (A) Multiply 16π by 1.5625 to find what the area of a circle that is
     56.25% greater in area would be. (This would represent 156.25% of
     the original circle—that is why we multiply by 1.5625 instead of just
     0.5625.)



     Note that we only multplied the 16 by the 1.5625 so that we can
     identify the radius more easily. So, the new circle will have a radius of
     5, since the area of a circle is π r 2 and the square root of 25 is 5.
11. (6) You can use substitution to solve for x. Take the second equation
     and find the value of y in terms of x:
     Then, substitute this in to the first equation to solve for x:




12. (C) Multiply the number of persons per square mile by the total
     number of square miles to find an approximation of the total
     population of the city:



13. (7) Be sure to solve for “x + 2” and not just for x. The expression x2 −
     4 can be rewritten as (x + 2)(x − 2), enabling you to plug in 3 for x − 2
     and solve for x + 2:




14. (A) As the height of the orangutans increases, their weight also
     increases. Choice (A), “The greater the height of the orangutan, the
     greater the weight,” correctly summarizes this trend.
15. (C) Use the volume formula for a cylinder, V = πr2h, in which r is the
     radius and h is the height. Note that this formula is provided in the
     formulas at the beginning of the section, so refer to it if you do not
     remember the formula. Since the tank has a base with a diameter of 10
      feet, the radius will be 5. Plug in the volume and the radius into the
      formula to solve for height:




16. (D) Plug 6 in for x to solve for the value of f (6):




17. (C) The number of respondents is sufficient to generalize on the voter
     preferences. However, the respondents were not randomly selected—
     they all chose to go to an online poll to vote for a particular candidate.
     People who chose to respond to the online poll are more likely
     enthusiastic about their political preferences; this self-selected group
     would therefore not accurately represent a cross-section of voters. The
     survey would have been more accurate if the respondents had been
     randomly selected instead of self-selected.
18.            Pick an ordered pair, (2, 5) would work, and plug it in to the
      equation y = kx to solve for the constant k:




19. (C) Add 5 to the equation to shift the equation upwards by 5 units:
     You can see the effect of this translation in the following graph:




20. (A) Plug in 2 for x and 5 for y, since this ordered pair represents a
     solution to the inequality:




     Since n must be less than or equal to 3, the greatest possible value for
     n is 3.
21. (B) There are 25 patients who had a positive test result. Out of those
     25 patients, 20 actually did not have the illness, meaning they had a
     false positive. So, divide 20 by 25 to find the probability that one of
     the positive test results was actually a false positive:




22. (C)




     If angle BAC equals angle DFE, as labelled above, the triangles would
     be congruent because of the Side-Angle-Side theorem. This theorem
     states that if two sides and the angle formed by these two sides are
     equal to two sides and the included angle in another triangle, the two
     triangles are congruent.

Section 2, Module 2: Math
 1. (A)
2. (D) The interval from 30–35 minutes has a decrease in distance of
   0.45 miles. This is the greatest decrease in distance over any time
   period portrayed in the graph, so choice (D) is the correct answer.
3. (1) Plug in 5 for x to the equation to solve for the value of y:




4. (A) The equation can be written in slope-intercept form since it is a
   line. Use k as the y-intercept:




   Now, plug in a point—we can use (1, 8)—for x and y to solve for k:




5. (D)




6. (44) Since this is a trapezoid, the top and bottom sides are parallel to
   one another. So, you can inscribe a right triangle within the trapezoid
   to find the length of the unknown side, as seen below.
   Then, add up the lengths of the sides to find the perimeter of the
   figure:



7. (B) The functions are all in slope-intercept form, and they all have
   different values for the slope. So, find the slope of the function by
   using the slope formula and plugging in two points. The cost
   corresponds to the y values and the pieces of fruit will be the x value.
   Use the points (6, 13.40) and (12, 25.40) in the slope formula:




   The only option that has 2 as its slope is choice (B). Alternatively, you
   could plug in values to the equations to see which one correctly
   models the numbers in the table.
8. (B) Manipulate the equation to isolate v:




9. (B) The range of the set (difference between the least and greatest
   terms) will increase by 25, since the smallest member of the set has 5
      subtracted from it and the largest member has 20 added to it. The
      standard deviation (the deviation from the mean) would increase
      slightly with these changes, but not nearly as much as the range would
      since the values of the other 13 members of the set will remain
      constant. So, choice (B) is the correct answer.
10. (D) Add the two functions together, combining like terms to put it in a
     simplified quadratic form:




      In this combined equation, the number 5 corresponds to the constant
      k, making choice (D) correct.
11.                    First, find the slope of the line comprised of the two
      points (5, 0) and (0, 3).




      Now, take the negative reciprocal of      to find the slope of a line
      perpendicular to this one:




12. (A)
     Since triangle EFG is equilateral, you can label ∠FEZ as 60 degrees.
     This turns triangle FEZ into a special right triangle—a 30-60-90
     triangle. The ratios of the sides in a 30-60-90 triangle are x,   , 2x.
     So, the length of     will be      since the x in this case is 5.
13. (B) Since 23% of the recommended daily value of calcium for an adult
     is 300 mg, calculate the total recommended daily value of calcium for
     an adult, x, using this equation:




     Now, find what percent of 1,304 that 210 is:




14. (3) 2π radians and 360 degrees both represent an entire circle. To see
     how many angles of the measure of π radians are in 360 degrees,
     divide 2π by π:




     So, there are 3 angles of this measure within 360 degrees.
15. (C) The greatest possible value for y occurs when y = x + 2, since that
     would maximize its value within the inequality. Set x + 2 equal to − x
     + 4, since the value of y would be at its maximum in both inequalities,
     and then solve for x:




     The correct answer is therefore choice (C).
16. (A) Try plugging in values from the table to determine which function
     correctly represents the relationship between the numbers. Before just
     plugging in numbers to every equation, think about the overall
     relationship of the numbers. As x increases, y decreases. So, choices
     (C) and (D) would not work because they would result in increasing
     functions. Then, you just need to try options (A) and (B). Use the
     ordered pair (1, 2) to see which of these would work:




     Therefore, the correct function is in choice (A).
17. (D) Use synthetic division to divide. Use 4, − 3, and 2 as the values in
     the top of the synthetic division format and use +3 to go through the
     synthetic division steps.




     This results in               , in which        is the remainder. You
     could also use long division to solve.
18. (C) A selection of the function is graphed below:
    While the function has a high degree, it has only three unique x
    intercepts: 0, 4, and − 3. You can see this by examining the equation
    to see what values of x would cause y to equal zero. If x = 0, x = 4, or
    x = − 3, the value of y will be equal to zero.
19. (B)
    Since there are twice as many elementary school students as middle
    school students, c = 2f and     . The number of elementary school
    students and middle school students is 150, so find the value of c:




    So, we know that c is 100.
     Since 60% of elementary school students take the bus, find 60% of
     100 to find the value for a: 0.6 × 100 = 60. Since the number of
     elementary school students is 100 total, subtract 60 from 100 to find
     the number of elementary school students who walk: 100 − 60 = 40.
     The total number of students who walk to school is 70 based on the
     table. So, find the number of middle school students who walk by
     subtracting 40 from 70:



     To more easily visualize this, all the solved values for the variables
     are plugged into the spots in the table below:




20. (C) The product of these two expressions will be undefined if the
     denominator on either expression is equal to zero. For , if x = 0, the
     expression is undefined. For       , if x = 1, the expression is
     undefined since the denominator x − 1 would equal zero if x = 1. So,
     the correct answer is choice C.
21. (7) The equation will equal zero when x = 5 and x = −2, as you can see
     below:




     and
    So, the points (5, 0) and (−2, 0) are the x intercepts of the parabola.
    Since the y values do not change, simply find the difference between
    the x values to find the distance between the x intercepts:



22. (15)




    Since 15 is the only numerical constant, it will equal c because the c
    term on the right-hand side does not have an x in it. So, the value of c
    is 15.
Practice Test 2

Section 1, Module 1: Reading and Writing
32 MINUTES, 27 QUESTIONS


DIRECTIONS
             You will be tested on a variety of important reading and writing skills. Each question
             has one or more passages, possibly including a graph or table. Carefully read each
             passage and question and choose the best answer to the question based on the
             passage(s).
             Every question in this section is multiple-choice, with four possible answers. Each
             question has only one best answer.




In science class, the two friends frantically mixed their chemical ingredients
together. They had failed to meet over the weekend and their assignment
was nowhere close to being finished. When they received a failing grade,
the teacher remarked that the ________ to their problem lay in adequate
preparation.

 1
Which choice completes the text with the most logical and precise word or
phrase?

        solution
        mixture
        choice
        origin

Thad walked through the tunnel to a loud applause. He strolled up to the
pitching mound and breathed deeply to calm his nerves. He threw hard and
fast but was _______. The catcher had to run and retrieve the wild pitch.

 2
Which choice completes the text with the most logical and precise word or
phrase?

        off his mark
        highly motivated
        not on the mound
        serene

The judge decided to ___________ on some mistakes as it was his first
case. She could remember fumbling through her opening argument the first
time she was in court.

 3
Which choice completes the text with the most logical and precise word or
phrase?

        provide the prosecutor with consequences       evoke carte blanche
        give the prosecutor leeway      grant the prosecutor amnesty Some
         bystanders overly concerned about potential litigation have
         chosen not to help for fear they would make the situation worse,
         thereby opening themselves up to lawsuits. Some states have
         passed varying degrees of protection known as “good Samaritan
         laws” so that people can feel comfortable helping. Some countries
         have even gone so far as to pass “duty to help” laws that generally
         require people to assist. While these laws are often criticized as
         legislating morality, they do help alleviate the negative ________
         of the bystander effect.

 4
Which choice completes the text with the most logical and precise word or
phrase?

        impacts
        collisions
        clashes
        accomplishments

Poker players are fond of saying that if you look around the table and can’t
spot the fool, run away as fast as you can; you’re it. The same goes for the
world of finance, which has quickly become as adversarial as a duel at high
noon. Such is the nature of equities, futures, bonds, and derivatives (to
name a few): any transaction has both a winner and a loser. Either the buyer
has purchased an instrument that is undervalued and will be worth more
tomorrow, or the seller has unloaded a bloated instrument that will fall back
closer to its “true” market valuation in the near future. Either way, dollars
(both unrealized and actual) will flow from one pocket to another.

 5
As used in the text, what does the word “bloated” most nearly mean?

        overvalued
        distended
        full
        waterlogged

The following text is from Christina Rossetti’s 19th-century poem “Who
Has Seen the Wind?”
     Who has seen the wind?
     Neither I nor you.
     But when the leaves hang trembling,
     The wind is passing through.
     Who has seen the wind?
     Neither you nor I.
     But when the trees bow down their heads,
     The wind is passing by.

 6
Which choice best describes the overall structure of the text?

          It analyzes the patterns of weather formation.
          It contemplates the meaning of new growth in nature.
          It presents different ways that the invisible wind may be seen.
          It considers the emotional impact that the wind can have on
           observers.

The following text is adapted from Daniel Defoe’s 1719 novel The Life and
Adventures of Robinson Crusoe. In it, the title character has left home
despite his parents’ wishes and sets out to find adventures on the sea.

     We were not much more than a quarter of an hour out of our ship till we
     saw her sink, and then I understood for the first time what was meant by
     a ship foundering in the sea. I could hardly watch, for from the moment
     that they rather put me into the boat than that I might be said to go in,
     my heart was, as it were, dead within me, partly with fright, partly with
     horror of mind, and the thoughts of what was yet before me.
     We got all safe on shore, where, as unfortunate men, we were used with
     great humanity, as well by the magistrates of the town, who assigned us
     good quarters, as by particular merchants and owners of ships, and had
     money given us sufficient to carry us either to London or back to Hull
     as we thought fit.

 7
Which choice best describes the function of the underlined sentence in the
text as a whole?

          To show the scorn with which people treat shipwrecked sailors
             To describe how those who experienced shipwrecks are treated
           with hospitality     To explain the envy that others have of those
           sailors who have been shipwrecked       To demonstrate how those
           who experienced shipwrecks are treated with humor The
           following text is adapted from W. E. B. Du Bois’s 1903 work “Of
           Sorrow Songs.”

     What are these songs, and what do they mean? I know little of music
     and can say nothing in technical phrase, but I know something of men,
     and knowing them, I know that these songs are the articulate message of
     the slave to the world. They tell us in these eager days that life was
     joyous to the black slave, careless and happy. I can easily believe this of
     some, of many. But not all the past South, though it rose from the dead,
     can gainsay the heart touching witness of these songs. They are the
     music of an unhappy people, of the children of disappointment; they tell
     of death and suffering and unvoiced longing toward a truer world, of
     misty wanderings and hidden ways.

 8
Based on the text, Du Bois’s attitude toward those who would suggest that
the songs of slaves expressed their happiness and joy is most likely one of
    complete agreement.

          qualified skepticism.
          outright dismissal.
          hopeful optimism.
The following text is from Harriet Beecher Stowe’s 1852 novel Uncle Tom’s
Cabin. She presents a scene from a time when slavery was widely
practiced.

     Late in the afternoon of a chilly day in February two gentlemen were
     sitting over their wine, in a well-furnished parlour in the town of
     P________ in Kentucky in the midst of an earnest conversation.
     “That is the way I should arrange the matter,” said Mr. Shelby, the
     owner of the place. “The fact is, Tom is an uncommon fellow; he is
     certainly worth that sum anywhere; steady, honest, capable, manages
     my farm like a clock. You ought to let him cover the whole of the debt;
     and you would, Haley, if you’d got any conscience.”
     “Well, I’ve got just as much conscience as any man in business can
     afford to keep,” said Haley, “and I’m willing to do anything to ‘blige
     friends; but this yer, ye see, is too hard on a feller, it really is. Haven’t
     you a boy or gal you could throw in with Tom?”

 9
Based on the text, Haley is best characterized as a/an

          humane empathizer.
          financial amateur.
          aggressive negotiator.
          passive mediator.


                                     Percent of           Percent of Students
                                   Students Who           Who Found Service
 Career Office Service              Used Service               Helpful
 Practice Interviewing                  31.2%                      69.9%
 Resume Assistance                      74.5%                      68.4%
 Workshops                              37.8%                      63.0%
 Job Listings                           55.4%                      62.1%
 Researching Employers                          32.2%                            60.5%
 Career Skills Testing                          29.4%                            52.4%

Information adapted from the Class of 2017 Student Survey, National Association of Colleges and
Employers The career services office at a college is analyzing the effectiveness of its offerings by
evaluating student opinions about the services offered. Some students suggest that the career services
office should offer services that students are more likely to find helpful. The administrator of the
career services office argues, however, that career services can only be helpful to the extent that
students use the services offered.


 10
Which choice most effectively uses data from the graph to support the
office administrator’s position?

           While 52.4% of surveyed students thought that career services
           testing would be helpful, only 29.4% of students took advantage
           of this offering.
           Interview practice and resume assistance are among the most
            sought-out services by college students today.
           Although 74.5% of surveyed students used career services resume
            assistance, only 68.4% of students found this service useful.
           Nearly identical percentages of students found that the workshops
            and job listings provided through career services were helpful.

Physicians claim that broken-heart syndrome often presents symptoms like
those of a heart attack but without the defining arterial blockage. Instead of
plaque blocking the arteries, scientists believe surrounding muscles
constrict the arteries, reducing the flow of blood to the heart and mimicking
a heart attack. Unlike a heart attack, broken-heart syndrome is rarely fatal,
and can even resolve itself within hours to weeks. Although patients often
recover from this condition quickly, the stress that is thought to cause this
condition may persist long after their so-called recovery. Unlike broken-
heart syndrome, prolonged stress can have consequences on long-term heart
health, resulting in heart disease, hypertension, and even stroke. Such
consequences exemplify the importance of psychological health, as it can
significantly affect one’s physical health.
 11
Which finding, if true, would most directly support the physicians’ claim?

        Researchers find that they can successfully differentiate between
         broken-heart syndrome and a heart attack by determining whether
         plaque is blocking the arteries.
        Sociologists report that increasing numbers of people are
         experiencing a decrease in their mental health due to prolonged
         stress.
        Psychiatrists find that there is a roughly equivalent likelihood of
         dying of broken-heart syndrome as there is from dying of a heart
         attack.
        A randomly controlled survey of adults between 50 and 70 years of
         age finds that heart attacks are a greater source of worry than
         broken-heart syndrome.

“On the Firing Line of Education” is a 1919 paper by A.J. Ladd, a professor
of education at the State University of North Dakota. In the paper, Professor
Ladd discusses the future of vocational education in American high schools.
He asserts that schools should help guide students into their most
appropriate vocational paths.

 12
Which quotation from “On the Firing Line of Education” most effectively
illustrates the assertion?

        “Children in these early years are not yet ready to choose their
         work of life; that they do not yet sufficiently know themselves—
         their own tastes and capacities for such serious choice.”
        “To place before children such attractive objective features would
         result in swerving many from the normal pathway of their
         development and check it midway. The result has been what
         might be called a compromise.”
        “Thru the child-study movement the teacher comes to know child
         nature so well that direct application can be made to the individual
         child and an intimate knowledge gained of his tastes, capacities,
         ambitions, and dominant interests.”
        “The high school is an institution established by a community for
         community purposes—to take its young people—all of them—
         and guide them thru the difficult and transitional period of
         adolescence, directing, inspiring, shaping, checking, developing
         for the largest manhood and womanhood possible and providing
         the community with efficient workmen in various lines.”

A student is studying Edmund Burke’s 18th-century work Selections from
the Speeches and Writings of Edmund Burke. The student is specifically
analyzing the selection under the title “Colonies and British Constitution.”
This selection is believed to have been written shortly before the American
Revolution and discusses the relationship between the United States and
Great Britain. The student argues that Burke asserted that at the time he
wrote the text, the recognition of civil rights for the citizens of countries
around the world was relatively limited.

 13
Which quotation from “Colonies and British Constitution” most effectively
illustrates the argument?

        “These are ties, which, though light as air, are as strong as links of
         iron.”
        “Slavery they can have anywhere. It is a weed that grows in every
         soil.”
        “Do not entertain so weak an imagination, as that your registers
         and your bonds . . . are what form the great securities of your
         commerce.”
        “Dead instruments, passive tools as they are, it is the spirit of the
         English communion that gives all their life and efficacy to them.”
Microplastics are microscopic particles of plastic that tend to accumulate
toxins and are in some cases toxic themselves. Unfortunately, microplastics
tend to end up being eaten by various organisms. The primary reason for
this problem is that in recent years, approximately 380 million tons of
plastic are produced annually. Plastic is not biodegradable, which means
that once it enters the environment it can take several hundred years to
degrade. Some have proposed plastic-eating microorganisms as a
revolutionary solution to this critical issue. Others are skeptical of the
claims made about ______________

 14
Which choice most logically completes the text?

        whether a bacteria could have any role in harming the
         environment.
        the capacity of microbiologists to analyze bacteria in a laboratory
         setting.
        this bacteria’s utility in consuming massive plastic deposits.
        the possibility of plastic extending the length it needs to
         biodegrade.

According to Florentine records between the end of the fourteenth century
and the middle of the fifteenth, the number of women participating in
tribunals dropped by 84 percent. The implications of this backslide are
significant. By 1450, the power of women to defend themselves in court
had suffered a significant blow. And while weakness in the courtroom may
not have significantly impacted the elite women of the upper classes, its
effects were undoubtedly felt by working women of the lower classes, who
were, by the late 1460s, __________

 15
Which choice most logically completes the text?

        essentially at the mercy of their accusers.
        able to successfully cite legal precedents in court proceedings.
        empowered with a spirit of judicial advocacy.
        strong advocates of violent means to obtain justice.

Career websites like LinkedIn, Dice, and Monster make it simple to get
started with your job search. ____________ work experience, intern or
research positions, and volunteer efforts.

 16
Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the conventions of
Standard English?

        Within your online, profiles it is critical that you include
        information, about your educational background, previous
          Within your online profiles it is critical that you include
        information about your educational background, previous
          Within your online profiles, it is critical that you include
        information about your educational background, previous
          Within your online profiles, it is critical that you include
        information about: your educational background, previous
        Capsaicin, the compound in peppers that makes them spicy, only
        affects mammals, so ______ effective in driving away squirrels
        and rodents. Like humans, these animals are often sensitive to
        spicy foods.

 17
Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the conventions of
Standard English?

        it’s
        its
        their
        there
According to Rognlie, the solution put forth in Capital in the Twenty-First
Century, since it will do little to limit ________ returns on assets, is no
solution at all.

 18
Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the conventions of
Standard English?

        homeowners’
        homeowner’s
        the home owner’s
        homeowners

The machine shown in Picabia’s drawing demonstrated his appreciation for
the technology of his time. However, the machine he depicted did not serve
any functional purpose, which he used to mock the excessive pride
inventors _______ after successfully creating an invention.

 19
Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the conventions of
Standard English?

        feeling
        have feeling
        will felt
        felt

Among the poems that he wrote during his lifetime, Bashō’s 1686 haiku
“The Old Pond” is his most well known and is, arguably, the best haiku of
all time. _________ was inspired by nature: it describes the splashes a frog
makes after it jumps into a pond.

 20
Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the conventions of
Standard English?

        Like many other haikus: Bashōs poem       Like many other haikus,
         Bashōs’ poem      Like many other haikus—Bashōs poem
          Like many other haikus, Bashō’s poem The Kafala System is a
         migrant worker system in the Middle East. In 2016, the United
         Arab Emirates (UAE) implemented reforms that __________ in
         employment and do not tie the worker to the employer.

 21
Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the conventions of
Standard English?

        allowing flexibility     allow flexibility
        has allow flexing
        allow flexing

Around 10,000 years ago, humans started farming in the Fertile Crescent.
Farming brought advantages like a more reliable food supply and a less
nomadic _____________

 22
Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the conventions of
Standard English?

        lifestyle but it also brought a new problem; rodents.
        lifestyle; but it also, brought a new problem—rodents.
        lifestyle, but it also brought a new problem rodents.
        lifestyle, but it also brought a new problem: rodents.

Once a birder has identified the kinds of food they want to put out, the next
step is to make sure the environment around the feeder is welcoming and
safe. Feeders should be placed either within three feet of or farther than 30
feet away from windows to avoid collisions as birds land and take off. Birds
_________ like to have cover as they eat; nearby shrubs and trees can
provide safety for birds when they feel threatened. Some birders even like
to provide water to go with the food.

 23
Which choice completes the text with the most logical transition?

        also
        on the other hand
        due to this
        as a result

The process of carbon fixation involves combining an enzyme called RuBP
oxygenase-carboxylase (rubisco) with carbon dioxide _______ form an
organic molecule; however, the rubisco molecule also has the potential to
use O2 as a substrate instead of CO2, which contributes to a side reaction
called photorespiration.

 24
Which choice completes the text with the most logical transition?

        because
        since
        while
        in order to

While researching a topic, a student has taken the following notes:
    Ibn Battuta was a famous explorer from the 1300s.
    He explored most of the Muslim world in his lifetime.
      He is believed to have travelled as far east as China and the
      Philippines, and as far west as Morocco.
      Because of his extensive studies in Mecca, Iba Battuta was prized as
      an Islamic scholar.
      Ibn Battuta successfully used his intellect to obtain influence with
      rulers and merchants around the world.

 25
The student wants to underscore the time period during which Ibn Battuta
conducted his exploration. Which choice most effectively uses relevant
information from the notes to accomplish this goal?

         Ibn Battuta traveled as far east as China and as far west as
          Morocco.
         Many rulers and merchants valued Ibn Battuta’s impressive
         academic background.
         During his travels, Ibn Battuta used his personal charisma to make
          connections.
         Ibn Battuta travelled through much of the world during the 1300s.

While researching a topic, a student has taken the following notes:
    Pumpkins come in a variety of colors beyond orange, including red,
    blue, pink, and white.
    Deep reddish orange pumpkins, commonly referred to as Cinderella
    pumpkins, are a French variety called Rouge Vif d’Etampes that was
    introduced to the United States in the late 19th century.
    Jarrahdale pumpkins are bluish grey with a golden orange interior and
    were developed in Australia.
    Porcelain Doll pumpkins were developed in the United States and are
    pale pink. They also have a wonderful taste, making them a good
    choice for pumpkin pie.
    Casperita pumpkins are small and white. While they are edible, their
    size makes them more common for decorations than for food.
 26
The student wants to highlight two pumpkin varieties that can be consumed
as food. Which choice most effectively uses relevant information from the
notes to accomplish this goal?

         Blue, white, and orange pumpkins will often be found on the
          dinner table.
         Jarrahdale and Cinderella pumpkins are considered delicacies.
         Both Porcelain Doll and Casperita pumpkins can be eaten.
         Porcelain Doll pumpkins are considered the most delicious
          pumpkin varietal.

While researching a topic, a student has taken the following notes:
      The Rice’s whale is a unique species of whale discovered in 2021.
      It is named after whale researcher Dale Rice.
      It can grow to a little over 40 feet long and has baleen instead of teeth.
      This whale is found in the Gulf of Mexico.
      The Rice’s whale is on the brink of extinction, with fewer than 100 of
      the whales believed to still be alive.
      Major threats to the Rice’s whale include pollution, especially oil
      spills.

 27
The student wants to suggest a reason why the Rice’s whale is quite
difficult to observe. Which choice most effectively uses relevant
information from the notes to accomplish this goal?

         With so few of the Rice’s whales left in the wild, whale spotting
         opportunities are quite rare.
         The Rice’s whale is unsurprisingly named for the man who
          discovered it—Dale Rice.
The geographic vicinity in which the Rice’s whale is found is yet
 to be established.
A potential oil spill poses a major threat to the long-term viability
 of the Rice’s whale.
Section 1, Module 2, Reading and Writing
32 MINUTES, 27 QUESTIONS


DIRECTIONS
             You will be tested on a variety of important reading and writing skills. Each question
             has one or more passages, possibly including a graph or table. Carefully read each
             passage and question and choose the best answer to the question based on the
             passage(s).
             Every question in this section is multiple-choice, with four possible answers. Each
             question has only one best answer.




The vestibular system is _______ in the inner ear and is comprised of three
tubes on each side of the head. Each tube on the right has a corresponding
tube on the left, making up three pairs.

 1
Which choice completes the text with the most logical and precise word or
phrase?

        residing
        located
        lodged
        dwelling

Staging can be a win-win situation for both the aspiring chef and the
mentor: the mentor receives help in the kitchen, and the aspiring chef
acquires new skills that he can apply in a future position. Stages at
prestigious restaurants can _______ a chef’s resume for future
opportunities.

 2
Which choice completes the text with the most logical and precise word or
phrase?

        cushion
        maintain
        bolster
        rebuild

Soap is made up of small molecules that have hydrophilic heads and
hydrophobic tails; the hydrophilic heads are attracted to water, while the
hydrophobic tails are _______ by water. The soap molecules, when
dissolved in water, float around and can either act independently or can join
with other soap molecules to form bubbles.

 3
Which choice completes the text with the most logical and precise word or
phrase?

        repelled
        levitated
        captivated
        narrowed

Organisms that must consume oxygen to live are known as aerobic
organisms, while those that do not need oxygen are considered anaerobic.
Aerobic organisms ______ most of their energy from a process known as
cellular respiration. This process is oxygen-requiring and cannot be
completed by anaerobic organisms. Cellular respiration produces 18 times
more energy units per glucose molecule consumed in glycolysis than the
anaerobic alternative, fermentation.

 4
Which choice completes the text with the most logical and precise word or
phrase?

         discover
         inhale
         derive
         discern

Since its development in 1932 by Soviet engineer Konstantin Khrenov,
marine welding has become a highly specialized and _________ career. As
the name suggests, marine welders construct or repair infrastructures like
oil rigs and bridges underwater. Welding occurs when structures like metals
or thermoplastics are heated to high temperatures and melted together,
causing the structures to bind.

 5
Which choice completes the text with the most logical and precise word or
phrase?

         monetary
         exorbitant
         budgetary
         lucrative

The following text is adapted from the 1918 American Federation of Labor
Records. In it, the American Federation of Labor discusses the possible
ramifications of labor uprisings and revolts in Europe as the end of World
War I approaches.

     The peace then offered would be even worse than that of Haase, namely,
     . . . adaptation of the status quo ante and “no annexations, no
     indemnities” formula, with neighboring nations bound by coerced
     economic treaties and “readjustments of the frontiers.”
     To aid the German Socialists (positively) and the Bolsheviki
     (negatively) is not only playing with fire, it is almost certain to end the
     war before German defeat or American victory—with all the
     consequences that must inevitably follow such an indecisive outcome.

 6
Which choice best describes the function of the underlined selection in the
text as a whole?

          To underscore potentially negative consequences     To predict
           pending physical harm      To demonstrate possible sources of
           reconciliation    To forecast a coming perpetual peace Text 1

Sitting at the Art Institute of Chicago is a famous work of art—A Sunday on
La Grande Jatte. The piece took artist Georges Seurat more than two years
to complete. The painting depicts 48 Parisian citizens spending their
afternoon along the Seine River. He sought to capture the timelessness seen
in historical art using pointillist technique. By positioning dots of
contrasting color closely together, the viewers’ eyes would naturally blend
the pigments when they looked upon it.

Text 2

Claude Monet’s painting, Impression: Sunrise, marked the beginning of the
impressionist movement. It was characterized by large, rough brushstrokes
that stood out on the canvas. Nature was the preferred muse of its painters,
focusing on the shifting light patterns across the environment. Because of
the focus on landscapes, most impressionist painters worked outside on
small canvases. They wanted to capture the scenery in its fleeting moments,
sometimes coming back and repainting the scene in different seasons.

 7
Based on the texts, the author of Text 2 is more concerned with what
objective than is the author of Text 1?
         Describing the specific painting technique used in a work
            Placing the analysis of a single painting in a larger artistic
          context      Analyzing the setting in which an artistic scene takes
          place      Noting the biographical details of a famous artist
          “Antigenic drift” and “antigenic shift” are the main ways
          influenza circumvents our adaptive immunity; they are likely the
          causes of epidemic and pandemic influenza, respectively. To date,
          16 HA and nine NA subtypes have been identified, only a fraction
          of which are currently infectious to humans. However, because
          the influenza genome is split into segments, when an animal—a
          bird, for instance—is co-infected with a strain specific to its
          species, as well as one capable of infecting humans, the segments
          may become intermixed during replication in a process called
          “viral reassortment.” When these reassorted genes include either
          HA or NA, antigenic shift occurs, and the resulting viral particles
          will express novel proteins to which the entire human race is
          vulnerable. The aggregation of many point mutations over time is
          known as antigenic drift, and eventually results in renewed
          vulnerability to viral strains against which an individual was
          previously immune.

 8
Based on the text, would antigenic drift or antigenic shift result in greater
fundamental changes to genetic structure?

         Antigenic drift because it results in increasing vulnerability to
          viruses.
         Antigenic drift because it can easily spread throughout the body.
         Antigenic shift because it entails genetic replication.
         Antigenic shift because it involves interspecies genome exchange.

The line between over-sterilization and under-sterilization seems to be a
tight rope with falling on either side leading to disaster. However, with
common sense and moderation, most healthy people can remain healthy
with little effort: Wash your hands when you suspect you may have been
exposed to something that could make you ill (raw meat, bathroom germs)
and before you eat. The rest of the time, let less harmful germs interact with
your immune system to keep you healthy.

 9
Which of the following, if true, would best support the narrator’s position?

         A research study finds that those who wash their hands
          approximately eight times per day have substantially lower
          incidence of illness than those who wash their hands more than 20
          times per day.
         Those who only wash their hands before a meal have less illness
          on average than those who wash their hands only after using the
          restroom.
         The germs that are most affected by hand washing are more
          prominent in urban areas than in rural areas.
         A chemist finds that for the vast majority of germs, hand sanitizer
          has the same impact on germ reduction as does hand washing.

The Jungle is a 1906 novel by Upton Sinclair. In this story, the characters
Jurgis, Ona, and Teta find it extremely difficult to plan their budget because
of the high likelihood of unpredictable expenses: ___________

 10
Which quotation from The Jungle most effectively illustrates the claim?

         “She had had to give up all idea of marrying then; the family could
          not get along without her—though for that matter she was likely
          soon to become a burden even upon them”
         “So Jurgis and Ona and Teta Elzbieta would hold anxious
          conferences until late at night, trying to figure how they could
          manage this too without starving.
          “This was in truth not living; it was scarcely even existing, and
           they felt that it was too little for the price they paid.”
          “There seemed never to be an end to the things they had to buy and
           to the unforeseen contingencies.”


                                  Demographic                Percentage
                               Men                               72%
 Gender
                               Women                             76%

                               Ages 18-29                        89%

                               Ages 30-49                        82%
 Ages
                               Ages 50-64                        65%


                               Ages 65+                          49%


                               High school                       72%

                               graduate or less
 Education Level               Some college                      78%


                               College graduate                  73%

                               and beyond
                               Less than $30,000                 79%
                               per year
                               Between $30,000                   73%

                               and $49,000
 Yearly Salary
                               Between $50,000                   70%
                               and $74,000
                               Greater than                      78%

                               $75,000
Source: Pew Research Center
A social scientist is researching the general characteristics of people who
use social networking websites. The scientist is putting together a
presentation and wants to give a concise example of a typical social
networking website user. Based on the latest research from the Pew
Research Center, the social scientist could best cite this type of person as an
example for her presentation: _________________.

 11
Which choice most effectively uses data from the graph to complete the
example?

         A 45-year-old man who has an advanced graduate degree          A
          35-year-old man who has a master’s degree in engineering        A
          25-year-old woman who left college without completing her
          degree      A 15-year-old girl who is a sophomore in high school
          The primary electrolytes lost during sweating are Na+ and K+.
          Water follows Na+ in the body, so when one sweats profusely, a
          decent number of electrolytes are lost as well. Researchers are
          looking at electrolyte loss in warm versus hot environments,
          wondering if there is a difference in performance from the amount
          of sweat lost. They hypothesize that losing body water would not
          be as detrimental during exercise in the cold.

 12
Which observation, if true, would most directly support the researchers’
hypothesis?

         During the winter months in the Northern Hemisphere, the
          temperatures in the Southern Hemisphere are generally warmer.
         The electrolytes Na+ and K+ can be easily supplemented in the
          diet through ingestible tablets.
         Those who have a relatively high body mass index tend to sweat
          more than those with a low body mass index.
           The average body does not sweat as much in a cold environment
            compared to a warm environment.

 Portfolio variance is an estimation of the risk of a portfolio, with a higher
number indicating a greater risk and a lower number indicating a lower risk.


            Number of Stocks                          Expected Portfolio Variance
                        1                                               46.6
                        2                                               26.8
                        4                                               16.9
                        6                                               13.7
                        8                                               12.0
                       10                                               11.0
                       20                                               9.0
                       50                                               7.8
                      100                                               7.5
                      1,000                                             7.1
Data gathered from Edwin Elton and Martin Gruber in their article “Risk Reduction and Portfolio
Size: An Analytical Solution,” published in The Journal of Business in 1977.


A stockbroker is trying to recommend the best portfolio construction for a
hypothetical client. The stockbroker wants to create a recommended course
of action for the hypothetical client to reduce risk but does not know the
precise makeup of the client’s stock portfolio. The stockbroker anticipates
that a significant reduction in portfolio risk would most likely come from
the following adjustment: ___________

 13
Which choice most effectively uses data from the table to complete the
statement?

           having two stocks instead of just one.
           having six stocks instead of four.
        having 20 stocks instead of 10.
        having 1,000 stocks instead of 100.

Many countries—including the U.S.—have used Keynesian initiatives to
varying degrees of success as a jumpstart for their failing economies. It is
difficult even for economists to say with any certainty why the policy has
worked so well for Sweden. One possible contributor is the remarkable
capacity for compromise demonstrated by Swedish politicians,
businessmen, labor unions and farmers, even in times of financial turmoil.
Although the Social Democrats have remained in power in Sweden for most
of the last century, 90% of Swedish industry remains privately owned; labor
disputes, in contrast, ___________

 14
Which choice most logically completes the text?

        are settled by a governmental bureau trusted by workers and
         management alike.
        are administered by entrepreneurs who seek to maximize profits
         for shareholders.
        look to stimulate the economy through increased governmental
         spending.
        are negotiated by opposing leaders who seek to maximize
         concessions from the other side.

Guest workers can be subject to abhorrent treatment: they often must pay
pre-arrival recruiters exorbitant fees for very minor work, and recruiters
may even hold _______ hostage until additional fees are paid.

 15
Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the conventions of
Standard English?

        workers passports’ and visas’
        workers passports and visas      workers’ passports and visas
           worker’s passports and visas The scientific method is the
         process that takes a hypothesis, tests it, and with careful
         observation, may lead to the discovery of new knowledge.
         _________

 16
Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the conventions of
Standard English?

        One of the key components of the scientific method is the ability to
         replicate findings.
        To replicate findings is, of the scientific method, one of the key
         components.
        Of the scientific method to replicate findings is one of the key
         components.
        Replicating findings of one of the components is, of the scientific
         method, key.

Cats may have been selectively bred by humans for traits like friendliness
and tameness, but they may also have developed those traits naturally
through generations of coexisting with humans. This is where the phrase
“cats domesticated themselves” comes from: no one is certain exactly how
we came to have ________ predators in our homes, but we certainly
appreciate them.

 17
Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the conventions of
Standard English?

        loveable, fluffy
        loveable fluffy
        loveable—fluffy—
        loveable; fluffy

During the first roller derby event called the Transcontinental Roller Derby,
each team consisted of ________ Additionally, female and male pairs
would compete against players of their respective gender, and all of the
players abided by the same roller derby rules.

 18
Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the conventions of
Standard English?

        two players: one woman; and one man.
        two players, one woman, and one man.
        two players: one woman and one man.
        two players; one woman—and one man.

Comité des Citoyens (the Committee of Citizens) brought Plessy v.
Ferguson to the Supreme Court, where the Court cemented the separate but
equal doctrine into law until it was ________ down in Brown v. Board of
Education.

 19
Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the conventions of
Standard English?

        striking
        strucked
        struck
        striked

The group of modern artists came up with their movement’s name after a
knife that was randomly inserted into a dictionary seemed to point to the
word “dada.” The ____________ to go against conformity and the violence
surrounding World War I. Dada was inspired by various art styles like
Expressionism, Cubism, Constructivism, and Futurism, although the
movement itself was not classified as an art style.

 20
Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the conventions of
Standard English?

        word “dada” means “hobby-horse” in French which suited the
         premise of the movement,         word “dada” means “hobby-horse”
         in French which suited the premise of the movement        word
         “dada” means “hobby-horse” in French; which suited the premise
         of the movement,        word “dada” means “hobby-horse” in
         French, which suited the premise of the movement Many of the
         greatest battles in history can be simplified to microcosmic
         struggles between two strong characters. Take Grant and Lee, for
         instance. Or consider David and Goliath if you prefer an older
         story. But not often _______ such a struggle occur when both
         great leaders are on the same side.

 21
Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the conventions of
Standard English?

        do
        doing
        does
        have done

For a casual birder—another name for “birdwatcher”—common backyard
birds like house sparrows, European starlings, and American robins can be
enough. ___________ want to see all kinds of birds in their backyards.

 22
Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the conventions of
Standard English?

        Some birders however have more ambition they         Some birders,
         however have more ambition; they        Some birders however
         have more ambition—they         Some birders, however, have more
         ambition: they Some interpret the pond in the poem as
         symbolizing subconsciousness—specifically, the
         subconsciousness of an older person. Just as frogs are motivated
         to jump into the water by instinct, humans relax and meditate
         because their biology prompts them to do so. ______ the frog
         jumping into the water symbolizes the meditative state of the
         older person.

 23
Which choice completes the text with the most logical transition?

        Also,
        Despite this,
        Additionally,
        Thus,

Creating the closest precursor of the periodic table, Chancourtois—utilizing
the invaluable molar mass work of Amedeo Avogadro—graphed 63 known
elements in order of increasing atomic weight on his “telluric helix,” and
observed an element’s chemical reactivity. __________ because
Chancourtois inexplicably included several polyatomic ions on the helix
and published his report using geological rather than chemical terminology,
his discovery was largely ignored.

 24
Which choice completes the text with the most logical transition?

        Simultaneously,
        Moreover,
        Naturally,
        Unfortunately,

While researching a topic, a student has taken the following notes:
    The submarine CCS Hunley was the first to sink another ship, the USS
    Housatonic.
    The Hunley was used by the Confederates during the Civil War and it
    was human-powered.
    The Hunley disappeared after its first and only attack that sank another
    ship.
    The Hunley remained missing until 2000 when it was raised from the
    sea floor.
    The Hunley was in surprisingly good condition, which allowed
    researchers to learn more about its final battle.

 25
The student wants to underscore why there was little information to be
found about the Hunley from the 20th century. Which choice most
effectively uses relevant information from the notes to accomplish this
goal?

        Given the near total destruction of the Hunley during a Civil War
         battle, it makes sense that there was little of historical significance
         available to analyze.
        Because the Hunley was preserved in excellent condition,
         researchers have frequently been able to gather information about
         it since the Civil War.
        Since the Hunley was only recently raised from the sea floor, it is
         understandable that there is little 20th-century research on this
         vessel.
        Lacking a fossil-fuel power source, the Hunley did not experience
         the same type of mechanical decay often observed in Civil War
          artifacts.

While researching a topic, a student has taken the following notes:
    The increasing digitization of historical records has increased access to
    those documents and helped increase the popularity of genealogy as a
    hobby.
    Genealogy is tracing one’s family history.
    Knowing a few key kinship terms will help the hobby genealogist get
    started.
    “Consanguinity” refers to family members you’re related to by blood.
    “Affinal” refers to family members you’re related to by marriage.

 26
The student wants to use specialized terminology to emphasize what can be
accomplished with digitized genealogical records. Which choice most
effectively uses relevant information from the notes to accomplish this
goal?

         Digitized genealogical records are made using advanced
          programming languages like Python and Java.
         With the aid of digitized genealogical records, hobby genealogists
          can learn about their family history.
         By learning about “family,” one can successfully navigate the
          complex world of digitized genealogy.
         Utilizing digitized genealogical records can enable you to
          determine consanguineous and affinal relations.

While conducting research, a student took these notes:

      Antibiotic resistance has been a growing concern in the medical field
      for the past decade.
      One pathway taken to resolve this is an adjuvant that targets bacterial
      translation.
      The gene, efp, codes for the elongation factor protein, EF-P, which
      works to increase the efficiency of polyproline synthesis.
      One study showed that the deletion of efp in bacteria increases its
      susceptibility to beta-lactam antibiotics.
      Another study tried this deletion but tested bacteria’s resistance to
      carbapenem antibiotics instead.

 27
The student wants to suggest a course of action that would provide
comparative analysis of the effectiveness of certain antibiotic medications.
Which choice most effectively uses relevant information from the notes to
accomplish this goal?

         The elongation factor protein and the polyproline synthesis should
          be examined to see which is more effective in minimizing illness.
         The results of the carbapenem study and the beta-lactam study
          should be compared to evaluate which antibiotic is more helpful.
         Studies comparing which bacteria are more susceptible and less
          susceptible to a particular antibiotic would go quite far in helping
          doctors skillfully treat patients.
         A historical survey of the treatments used prior to the advent of
          antibiotics would educate practitioners about the evolution of
          medical interventions.
Section 2, Module 1: Math
35 MINUTES, 22 QUESTIONS


DIRECTIONS

 All expressions and variables use real numbers.
 All figures are drawn to scale.
 Every figure lies in a plane.
 The domain of given functions is the set of all real numbers for which the corresponding value of
 the function is real.
For multiple-choice questions, solve the problem and pick the correct answer from the provided
choices. Each multiple-choice question has only one correct answer.
For student-produced response questions, solve each problem and record your answer following
these guidelines:

 If you find more than one correct answer, enter just one answer.
 You can enter up to five characters for a positive answer and up to six characters (this includes the
 negative sign) for a negative answer.
 If your answer is a fraction that does not fit in the given space, enter the decimal equivalent
 instead.
 If your answer is a decimal that does not fit in the given space, enter it by stopping at or rounding
 up at the fourth digit.
 If your answer is a mixed number (like       ), enter it as an improper fraction (9/2) or its decimal
 equivalent (4.5).
 Do not enter symbols like a comma, dollar sign, or percent sign.




                                         Examples

            Answer                   Acceptable Entries               Unacceptable Entries
                                                                       That Will Receive
                                                                          Zero Credit
                4.5                               4.5
                                                 4.50
                                                                                    41/2
                                                 9/2
                                                 8/9                     0.88
                                                .8888                     .88
                                                .8889                    0.89
                                                0.888                     .89
                                                0.889
                                                 −1/9                    −.11
                                                −.1111                   −0.11
                                                −0.111


REFERENCE




The number of degrees of arc in a circle is 360.
The number of radians of arc in a circle is 2π.
The sum of the measures in degrees of the angles of a triangle is 180.




 1
What is an equivalent form of (0.8a + 0.7b) − (1.4a − 0.3b)?
        2.2a + b
        −0.6a + b
        1.12a − .21b
        −0.6a − 0.4b

 2




Based on the graph of the line above, what is its slope?


        1
 3
If 12x − 10 = 4, what is − 5 + 6x?




 4
The volume of a cylinder, v, is given by the equation v = πr2h, in which r is
the radius of the cylinder and h is the height of the cylinder. What is the
height in terms of the other variables?




         h = πr2v

 5
Voter turnout rates for different U.S. presidential elections are given in the
following graph:
Source: electionproject.org


During what year was voter turnout the highest?

           1996
           2004
           2008
           2016

 6
Which of these options is equivalent to the following expression?



           4y4 − 2y2
           4y2 − 2y
           −3y
           6y + 2

 7




In the figure above, lines AEB, CE, and DE all intersect at point E and have
measures as indicated. What is the measure of angle ∠CED?

           20°
           30°
        45°
        60°

 8

                                (x + 2)3 = 27
What positive value of x would make the above equation true?




 9




A restaurant tabulated meals from 100 of its diners to record if the diner
ordered an appetizer and/or a dessert with a meal. Based on the table above,
what is the probability that if a diner ordered dessert, they would also order
an appetizer?




 10
What is the x-coordinate of the x-intercept of the line with the above
equation?




 11
The graph of                in the xy-plane is a line. What is the y-intercept of
this line?

             −2. 5
             −2


             2

 12
If                    and     , what is the value of y?




 13
Which of the following would be points at which the function y = (x + 4) (x
− 5) x intersects the x axis?

        I. (−4, 0)
      II. (5, 0)
     III. (0, 0)

             I only
        II only
        I and III only
        I, II, and III

 14



The growth of a population of bacteria is modeled by the above function, in
which B(h) represents the number of bacteria after h hours have passed.
After how many hours will the population of bacteria be 8 times its initial
number?

        1 hour
        2 hours
        3 hours
        4 hours

 15


                                       Number of Spins with That Total
      Total of Combined Spins                      Value
                   2                                    1
                   3                                    2
                   4                                    2
                   5                                    4
                   6                                    5
                   7                                    6
                   8                                    7
                   9                                    4
                   10                                   3
                   11                                   4
                  12                                      2



Pete was playing a children’s game that had a spinner with values 1-6; with
each turn, he spins the spinner twice and finds the total. He tabulated the
combined values of two combined spins from a total of 40 different turns as
shown above. What fraction of all his combined spins were 6 or less?




 16
The population of the greater metropolitan area of Mexico City was
estimated to have been 22,000,000 at the end of the year 2020. If the
Mexico City area represented 17% of all of Mexico’s population at the end
of 2020, what would be the closest estimate of Mexico’s total population?

         4,000,000
         26,000,000
         104,000,000
         129,000,000

 17
For the function f as defined below, what is the value of f (5)?




 18
The solutions to this set of inequalities are found in which quadrant(s) of
the xy-coordinate plane?



         Only quadrant 1
         Only quadrant 3
         Quadrants 1 and 4 only
         Quadrants 2 and 3 only

 19
If a computer costs $2,000 and depreciates (i.e., the value decreases) by the
same amount each year, how much is the annual amount of depreciation if
after 6 years the computer is worth $800?

         $80
         $100
         $200
         $400

 20
If a circle graphed in the xy-coordinate plane has a center at (3, 4) and
intersects the origin, what is the equation of the circle?

         (x − 3)2 + (y − 4)2 = 25
         (x + 3)2 − (y + 4)2 = 25
         x2 + y2 = 49
         x2 + y2 = 25

 21
Susan blinks an average of 20 times per minute while awake. In the 16
hours she is awake in a day, how many times will she blink?
        320
        7,680
        12,400
        19,200

 22
Hugo’s $3,000 monthly budget is broken down in this table:

                  Rent                                  $800
              Car expenses                              $400
              Student loans                             $300
                 Savings                                $250
                  Food                                  $450
                 Utilities                              $250
                 Clothing                               $150
              Miscellaneous                             $400

Hugo is trying to allocate more money into savings. If he cut his allocation
towards miscellaneous expenses by half and allocated this amount to
savings, by what percentage would his monthly savings increase?

        20%
        50%
        65%
        80%
Section 2, Module 2: Math
32 MINUTES, 27 QUESTIONS


DIRECTIONS

 All expressions and variables use real numbers.
 All figures are drawn to scale.
 Every figure lies in a plane.
 The domain of given functions is the set of all real numbers for which the corresponding value of
 the function is real.
For multiple-choice questions, solve the problem and pick the correct answer from the provided
choices. Each multiple-choice question has only one correct answer.
For student-produced response questions, solve each problem and record your answer following
these guidelines:

 If you find more than one correct answer, enter just one answer.
 You can enter up to five characters for a positive answer and up to six characters (this includes the
 negative sign) for a negative answer.
 If your answer is a fraction that does not fit in the given space, enter the decimal equivalent
 instead.
 If your answer is a decimal that does not fit in the given space, enter it by stopping at or rounding
 up at the fourth digit.
 If your answer is a mixed number (like       ), enter it as an improper fraction (9/2) or its decimal
 equivalent (4.5).
 Do not enter symbols like a comma, dollar sign, or percent sign.




                                         Examples

                                                                      Unacceptable Entries
            Answer                   Acceptable Entries                That Will Receive
                                                                          Zero Credit
                4.5                               4.5
                                                 4.50
                                                                                    41/2
                                                 9/2
                                                 8/9                      0.88
                                                .8888                      .88
                                                .8889                      .89
                                                0.888                     0.89
                                                0.889
                                                 −1/9                    −.11
                                                −.1111                   −0.11
                                                −0.111


REFERENCE




The number of degrees of arc in a circle is 360.
The number of radians of arc in a circle is 2π.
The sum of the measures in degrees of the angles of a triangle is 180.




 1
The function g is defined by                      . What is the value of g(−2)?
        −4
        −2
        −1
        4

 2


                  x                                    f(x)
                  3                                     −1
                  6                                      0
                  9                                      1



For the linear function f, the table above shows some values of x and the
corresponding values of f(x). Which of the following equations correctly
defines the function?




        f(x) = x − 6
        f(x) = 3x + 2

 3
Which of these is equivalent to        ?




        a2
        a5

 4
If y = ax in which a is a constant and y = 16 when x = 8, what is the value of
x when y is −3?

         −6
         −1.5
         1
         8.5

 5



In the equation above, a, b, and c are all constants. What is the sum of a, b,
and c?

         48
         50
         52
         64

 6



Ana receives an allowance of $10 per week. The function above shows how
much money she will have in her savings account after w weeks, assuming
she saves all her allowance in the account. What does the number 500
represent in the function?

         The money in her account at the beginning of the time period
            The money in the account at the end of the time period     The
          weekly increase in money in the account      The net profit she
          receives after expenses 7
On a map, 1 inch represents 3 miles in actual distance. If there is a
rectangular plot of land on the map with a width of 2 inches and a length of
3 inches, what would be the actual area of the rectangular plot of land in
square miles?




 8
Samara drove on a 400-mile trip. If the first half of the trip took her 4 hours
of driving to complete and the second half took her 6 hours of driving to
complete, what was her average driving speed for the whole 400-mile trip?

         20 miles per hour   35 miles per hour         40 miles per hour
           80 miles per hour 9




The above triangles ABC and DEF are similar to one another, with angle B
corresponding to angle E. What is the tangent of angle C?
 10




If the airplane continues to decrease in value at a linear rate, at what year
after purchase will the plane first closely approximate a value of zero
dollars?

         10 years after purchase     15 years after purchase       20 years
          after purchase     25 years after purchase 11
If x is increased by 400%, what is the result in terms of x?

         z
         2x     4x     5x 12
In the figure above, ABCD and AEFG are similar rectangles. If AB is 4 units
long, BC is 6 units long, and FG is 10 units long, what is the perimeter of
rectangle AEFG?

        24 units     48 units     50 units    72 units 13
How many zeros will a line with the equation y = k have in which k is a
constant greater than zero?

        Zero     One    Two         Cannot be determined from the given
         information 14




Based on the information in the table, what is the median quiz score of the
combined set of both classes?




 15
What would be the value(s) of x that would be a solution or solutions to this
equation?




         −2
         2
         4
         There are no solutions.

 16
What is the vertex of a parabola with the equation y = (x − 6)2?

         (−6, 0)    (0, 0)     (6, 0)    (0, 6) 17
Out of all the 44 people to serve as president of the United States before the
year 2020, 14 of them had previously been U.S. vice president. Which
function expresses the relationship between the number of presidents, P,
and vice presidents who became presidents, V?

         V = 14P




 18




If the above set of equations has infinitely many solutions, what is the value
of the constant a?
 19
Julian and Maria are budgeting for their upcoming wedding reception. They
are inviting people from each side of their families—J people from Julian’s
side of the family and M people from Maria’s side of the family. They are
planning on spending $40 per person invited to the wedding reception. If
they want to keep the cost of the wedding reception to less than $18,000,
and have more than 200 people in attendance, which system of inequalities
would represent these conditions?




 20
Given that there are 5,280 feet in a mile, which of the following would most
closely approximate 30 miles per hour in feet per second?

        28 feet/second  44 feet/second        176 feet/second      158,400
         feet/second 21
The circle graphed above has a center of C, a radius of 7 units, and a central
angle ∠ACB with a measure of 100°. What is the area of the sector of the
circle designated by ∠ACB to the nearest whole square unit?




 22
At a café, each cup of coffee has 95 milligrams of caffeine, and each cup of
tea has 26 milligrams of caffeine. Shantiel goes to the store and purchases
only cups of coffee and tea. If the number of cups of coffee that Shantiel
purchased was half the number of cups of tea that she purchased, and the
total milligrams of caffeine in all the drinks she purchased was 735, how
many cups of coffee did she purchase?

        2
        3
        5
        6
                           ANSWER KEY
                               Practice Test 2

Section 1, Module 1: Reading and Writing
 1.   A
 2.   A
 3.   C
 4.   A
 5.   A
 6.   C
 7.   B
 8.   B
 9.   C
10. A 11. A 12. D
13. B
14. C
15. A 16. C
17. A 18. A 19. D
20. D
21. B
22. D
23. A 24. D
25. D
26. C
27. A
Section 1, Module 2: Reading and Writing
 1.   B
 2.   C
 3.   A 4. C
 5.   D
 6.   A 7. B
 8.   D
 9.   A 10. D
11. C
12. D
13. A 14. A 15. C
16. A 17. A 18. C
19. C
20. D
21. C
22. D
23. D
24. D
25. C
26. D
27. B

Section 2, Module 1: Math
 1.   B
 2.   C
 3.   2
 4.   A 5. C
 6.   C
 7.   D
 8. 1
 9. B
10.
11. B
12.
13. D
14. C
15. D
16. D
17. 12
18. D
19. C
20. A 21. D
22. D

Section 2, Module 2: Math
 1.   A 2. A 3. C
 4.   B
 5.   B
 6.   A 7. 54
 8.   C
 9.   B
10. C
11. D
12. C
13. A 14. 3
15. D
16. C
17. B
18. 144
19. D
20. B
21. 43
22. C
Digital SAT Scoring Chart
This will give you an approximation of the score you would earn on the
Digital SAT.1 Tally the number of correct answers from the Reading and
Writing section (out of 54) and the Math section (out of 44). Take the total
for each of these and find the corresponding section score in the tables
below.


 Number of Correct Reading and           Reading and Writing Test Score
  Writing Questions (Out of 54)                   (Out of 800)
                   0                                     200
                   1                                     210
                   2                                     220
                   3                                     230
                   4                                     240
                   5                                     250
                   6                                     260
                   7                                     270
                   8                                     280
                   9                                     290
                  10                                     300
                  11                                     310
                  12                                     330
                  13                                     340
                  14                                     350
                  15                                     360
                  16                                     380
                  17                                     390
                  18                                     400
                  19                                     410
Number of Correct Reading and    Reading and Writing Test Score
 Writing Questions (Out of 54)            (Out of 800)
              20                              430
              21                              440
              22                              460
              23                              470
              24                              490
              25                              500
              26                              510
              27                              520
              28                              530
              29                              540
              30                              550
              31                              560
              32                              570
              33                              580
              34                              590
              35                              600
              36                              610
              37                              620
              38                              630
              39                              640
              40                              650
              41                              660
              42                              670
              43                              680
              44                              690
              45                              700
              46                              710
              47                              720
              48                              730
  Number of Correct Reading and                       Reading and Writing Test Score
   Writing Questions (Out of 54)                               (Out of 800)
                        49                                                 740
                        50                                                 750
                        51                                                 760
                        52                                                 770
                        53                                                 790
                        54                                                 800




1 Keep in mind that some of the questions on an actual SAT test will be research questions that will
not count towards your actual score. For the sake of simplicity, we are including possible research
questions in your calculation.



       Number of Correct Math                        Math Section Score (Out of 800)
        Questions (Out of 44)
                         0                                                 200
                         1                                                 220
                         2                                                 230
                         3                                                 240
                         4                                                 250
                         5                                                 280
                         6                                                 300
                         7                                                 320
                         8                                                 340
                         9                                                 350
                        10                                                 360
                        11                                                 380
                        12                                                 390
                        13                                                 400
                        14                                                 410
Number of Correct Math   Math Section Score (Out of 800)
 Questions (Out of 44)
          15                           430
          16                           440
          17                           450
          18                           460
          19                           480
          20                           490
          21                           500
          22                           510
          23                           520
          24                           530
          25                           540
          26                           550
          27                           560
          28                           570
          29                           580
          30                           590
          31                           600
          32                           610
          33                           620
          34                           630
          35                           650
          36                           660
          37                           680
          38                           690
          39                           700
          40                           720
          41                           750
          42                           770
          43                           790
       Number of Correct Math                      Math Section Score (Out of 800)
        Questions (Out of 44)
                       44                                        800



Add the Reading and Writing section score and the Math section score to
find your total SAT test score: _____________ Reading and Writing
Section Score +

_____________ Math Section Score =

_____________ Total SAT Test Score (between 400 and 1600)
Approximate your testing percentiles (1st to 99th) using this chart:2




2Scoring Data based on information at collegeboard.org
Answer Explanations
Section 1, Module 1: Reading and Writing
 1. (A) The teacher is suggesting what the students can do to no longer
    fail their assignments—therefore, the teacher is providing them with a
    “solution.” Although the assignment relates to mixing chemicals, the
    teacher is not suggesting a different “mixture.” “Choice” and “origin”
    would not necessarily relate to solving the problem.
 2. (A) The phrase “off his mark” means that the throw was inaccurate,
    making choice (A) correct. This can be seen by the fact that the
    catcher had to run and fetch the wild pitch. It is not choice (B)
    because there is no question that the pitcher is motivated—he is just
    not accurate with his throw. It is not (C) because the previous sentence
    says that he mounted the mound. It is not (D) because the pitcher is
    nervous, not serene or calm.
 3. (C) The judge is trying to be patient and understanding with the
    prosecutor because it was his first case. As such, she will give him
    “leeway” to make some errors, making choice (C) correct. It is not
    choice (A) because the judge is being patient with the prosecutor, not
    giving him consequences. It is not (B) because “carte blanche” means
    to give someone total freedom—this is too extreme as the judge is
    only giving the prosecutor leeway on “some mistakes,” not all of
    them. It is not (D) because the prosecutor does not need freedom from
    punishment, which is what amnesty is; instead, he simply needs the
    judge to be more patient with his rookie mistakes.
 4. (A) “Impacts” best fits the meaning needed in this context, since the
    author is referring to the negative consequences or effects of the
    bystander effect. Choices (B) and (C) are overly violent, and (D) is
    overly positive.
 5. (A) The text refers to a seller ridding himself of a “bloated
    instrument” which will certainly devalue. Hence, overvalued is a
   precise word choice. While the other choices are synonyms of
   bloated, they do not capture the author’s meaning as related to inflated
   value.
6. (C) The narrator rhetorically asks “who has seen the wind?,” then
   states that no one has. Instead, we have seen its effects indirectly from
   the trembling of the leaves and the bending of the trees. So, the
   overall structure of the text is that it presents different ways that the
   invisible wind may be seen. It is not choice (A) because it does not
   examine weather formation in general. It is not (B) because the focus
   is on the wind, not natural growth. It is not (D) because the emotional
   impact of the wind is not discussed.
7. (B) This sentence explains that the men who were rescued from the
   sinking ship were given a place to stay and enough money to
   complete their journey. The citizens of the town were hospitable
   toward the men when they landed, making choice (B) the best option.
   There is no evidence within the text that they were treated with scorn
   (looked down upon), envy, or humor, making the other choices
   incorrect.
8. (B) In reference to some thinkers who might believe that the slave
   songs expressed joy for a carefree and happy life, Du Bois states that
   he can believe it of “some, of many.” However, Du Bois goes on to
   state from his viewpoint, the songs of slaves generally express the
   “music of an unhappy people.” Therefore, he ultimately believes that
   the songs are largely expressions of the extremely difficult lives that
   slaves led. So, it is reasonable to infer that Du Bois would have an
   attitude of qualified skepticism toward these claims, since he
   acknowledges that there may have been some joy expressed in the
   songs—this is his “qualification” of the claim. He is primarily
   skeptical, however, believing that the emotional expressions of the
   songs are mainly ones of sadness. It will not be choices (A) or (D)
   since they are overly positive. And it is not (C) because he does not
   completely dismiss those who may think that the songs were happier.
9. (C) From the conversation between Haley and Mr. Shelby, it is clear
   that Haley is first and foremost a businessman. Moreover, he won’t be
     persuaded to just accept Tom as payment for the debt, so choice (C) is
     an accurate depiction of his character. He is neither empathizing nor
     passive. In fact, he is nearly uncompromising. Finally, choice (B)
     won’t work because we can infer by his negotiation skills that he is
     not an amateur.
10. (A) The office administrator argues that career services are only useful
     if students actually take advantage of them. Choice (A) best supports
     this position because it is the service that the students least used, and
     it is also the one that students thought would be the least helpful.
     Perhaps if more students actually tried the career testing, more of
     them would find it to be helpful. Choices (B) and (D) do not compare
     the helpfulness and usefulness of services, instead focusing on just
     one aspect. Choice (C) does not show a large gap between those who
     used a service and those who thought it would be helpful.
11. (A) If we examine the first sentence of the text, we see that broken-
     heart syndrome often looks like a heart attack with one key difference
     —there is no arterial blockage. That would mean that if we wished to
     tell the difference between the two, we could simply look for arterial
     blockage. If it were absent, we could conclude that the patient is
     suffering from broken-heart syndrome, not a heart attack. This makes
     choice (A) the best answer. The other choices do not directly relate to
     the claim as stated in the first sentence of the text.
12. (D) Vocational paths have to do with career choices. Choice (D) best
     deals with the assertion because it mentions “providing the
     community with efficient workmen in various lines.” Choice (A)
     asserts that children are not ready to figure out their careers. Choice
     (B) does not discuss careers at all. Choice (C) is too vague as it would
     relate to career choices and does not suggest that schools should be in
     the business of helping guide students in their job options.
13. (B) This quotation provides the most direct support to the idea that at
     the time of the text’s composition, the recognition of civil rights for
     the citizens of countries around the world was relatively limited. It is
     not choice (A) because this quotation refers to the connection Burke
     believes that the colonists and the British people share. It is not (A) or
     (D) because these quotations directly question supposed sources of
     British governmental authority.
14. (C) The previous sentence states that plastic-eating microorganisms
     could help solve the problem of plastic waste in the environment. The
     final sentence of the text begins by showing a contrast with the
     previous sentence—it states that “others are skeptical of the claims.”
     Thus, it makes sense that the insertion should refer to whether bacteria
     could consume plastic deposits. Choice (A) is too vague. Choice (B)
     does not make a logical contrast. Choice (D) would make matters
     worse and so does not make sense.
15. (A) The text shows that in 14th- and 15th-century Florence, women
     were less and less likely to participate in court proceedings. The
     narrator acknowledges that many upper-class women may not have
     been affected by this, but that lower-class women were. A way of
     expressing that lower-class women were negatively affected by not
     being able to participate in court proceedings would be to state that
     they were “essentially at the mercy of their accusers,” meaning that
     they could not advocate for themselves while their accusers could
     make whatever claims they wished. All of the other options would
     suggest that these women were more powerful than they in fact were
     in this historical context.
16. (C) This choice separates the introductory phrase, “Within your online
     profiles,” from the independent clause that follows. Choice (A) has
     confused word order, (B) lacks a comma after the introductory phrase,
     and (D) inserts an unnecessary colon, creating a far too abrupt pause.
17. (A) “It’s” means “it is,” which is correct given the context—this is the
     only option that has an implicit verb. “Its” and “their” are used to
     show possession. “There” typically refers to a place.
18. (A) “Homeowners’” correctly indicates that there are multiple
     homeowners who possess returns on assets. Choices (B) and (C) are
     singular, and (D) does not indicate possession.
19. (D) “Felt” is the only option that maintains the past tense verb use in
     the sentence as seen in the other verbs “depicted” and “used.”
20. (D) Choice (D) provides a comma after the introductory dependent
     clause and an apostrophe with “s” after the person’s name to signify
     possession, which is logical since the name is singular. Choices (A)
     and (C) do not have an apostrophe at all, and choice (B) would be
     used for plural possession.
21. (B) “Allow” is parallel to the next part of the sentence that uses the
     verb “tie.” The other options lack parallel structure. Also, “flexibility”
     is what it would make sense to permit, not “flexing” as one would do
     with a muscle.
22. (D) This option provides a needed pause between the two independent
     clauses in the sentence and before the clarification of “rodents.”
     Choice (A) has no pause before “but,” choice (B) has an unneeded
     pause after “also,” and choice (C) gives no pause before “rodents.”
23. (A) “Also” gives the most logical transition, introducing another
     description of birds in the sentence. The other options are overly
     wordy and do not provide a logical transition. Choice (B) incorrectly
     shows a contrast, and choices (C) and (D) incorrectly show cause and
     effect.
24. (D) “In order to” provides a logical transition between combining an
     enzyme and forming the organic molecule. The other options do not
     provide a logical transition. Choices (A) and (B) show cause and
     effect and (C) shows a contrast.
25. (D) The student wants to emphasize the time period when Ibn Battuta
     travelled. Choice (D) is the only option that explicitly refers to the
     time when he made his explorations—the 1300s. The other options
     use information from the text but do not mention the time.
26. (C) Focus on the specific claim—the student wants to show that there
     are two pumpkin varieties that can be eaten. Based on the notes,
     Casperita pumpkins are “edible” and Porcelain Doll pumpkins are a
     “good choice for pumpkin pie,” implying that they too are edible. So,
     choice (C) is the most logical option. The other options refer to
     pumpkins in the notes that are not consistently referred to as being
     edible.
27. (A) If there are few of the Rice’s whales left, it makes sense that there
     are fewer opportunities to observe them—thus, choice (A) is the most
     logical answer. Choice (B) does not have to do with the observability
     of the whale. Choice (C) is not supported by the notes since the whale
     is found in the Gulf of Mexico. Choice (D) refers to a potential future
     event, not to something that presents an issue for observation in the
     present moment.

Section 1, Module 2: Reading and Writing
 1. (B) The sentence shows where in the body the vestibular system is
    found, so “located” is most appropriate. The other options would be
    more appropriate in referring to people and where they live instead of
    where a bodily system is located.
 2. (C) “Bolster” means “to solidify or build” in this context, making it
    the most logical option to refer to improving one’s resume. “Cushion”
    and “rebuild” would suggest protecting one’s career against a
    hardship while the emphasis here is on positive growth. And
    “maintain” does not suggest growth but keeping things as they are.
 3. (A) The “while” in this sentence indicates a contrast between the
    attraction that the hydrophilic heads have towards water and the
    repulsion that the hydrophobic tails have. Thus, “repelled” makes the
    most sense. Another way you could think about this is to look at the
    word roots—“phobic” indicates fear or repulsion, making this a
    logical option. The other options would not provide a logical contrast
    with “attracted.”
 4. (C) “Derive” means “obtain,” making this a logical option to express
    how aerobic organisms gather their energy. It is not “discover” or
    “discern,” since these are advanced thought processes that are not
    integral to obtaining energy. It is not “inhale” because while oxygen
    may be inhaled, the energy is gathered from the process of cellular
    respiration.
 5. (D) “Lucrative” suggests that marine welding would be a career that
    has a high salary. While the other options could be associated with
   money, they would not be logically applicable to this situation, in
   which the potential earnings from a career are described.
6. (A) In the text, the author summarizes his argument that aiding the
   German Socialists and recognizing the Bolsheviki would be “playing
   with fire”—i.e., would lead to potentially negative consequences due
   to an indecisive outcome to the war. It is not choice (B) because this is
   too literal an interpretation. And it is not (C) or (D) because this
   phrase does not refer to making peace or reconciling.
7. (B) Text 1 provides a detailed description of the painting A Sunday on
   La Grande Jatte, while Text 2 looks at how Claude Monet’s painting
   Impression: Sunrise fits into the overall context of the impressionist
   movement. This makes choice (B) the most logical option. It is not
   choice (A) because Text 1 descries the painting technique. It is not (C)
   because Text 1 describes the setting of the painting. It is not (D)
   because Text 2 does not provide biographical details about Monet.
8. (D) The text describes the genetic changes associated with antigenic
   shift, stating that via “viral reassortment” the particles will produce
   completely new proteins “to which the entire human race is
   vulnerable.” While the antigenic drift can also result in renewed
   vulnerability, it is to viral strains of which one was previously
   immune. Therefore, the changes would not be as great as those
   associated with antigenic shift. Likewise, the author uses the example
   of a genome split in a bird that is capable of infecting humans making
   (D), rather than (C), the correct choice.
9. (A) The narrator argues that balance is key to achieving the best health
   results with handwashing. If you wash your hands too frequently, it
   can cause problems; similarly, if you wash your hands infrequently, it
   can cause problems. Choice (A) is the most logical option because it
   suggests that those who wash their hands just eight times a day have
   less illness than those who wash their hands far more frequently. It is
   not (B) because these are both situations in which the narrator
   believes handwashing would be warranted. It is not choice (C)
   because the narrator does not make any comparisons about geography.
     It is not choice (D) because the narrator does not consider the effects
     of hand sanitizer.
10. (D) The idea that needs support is that the characters in the novel find
     it quite difficult to plan their budget because of how unpredictable
     expenses are. Choice (D) provides the best support for this since it
     mentions how there is no end to the things they had to buy and to
     unforeseen contingencies, i.e., random expenses that come up. Choice
     (A) does not focus on budgetary matters. Choices (B) and (C) do not
     refer to unpredictable expenses.
11. (C) The graph indicates that women, those in the age group of 18–29,
     and those who have completed some college are the most likely
     categorizations to use social networking sites—choice (C) is the only
     option that fits all these criteria. Choices (A) and (B) both have males,
     and (D) uses an age group that is outside the range given by the graph.
12. (D) The researchers’ hypothesis is that losing body water is not as
     detrimental if one is losing it while exercising in cold weather. If
     someone does not sweat as much in a cold environment, there would
     be less of a need to have water in one’s body to produce sweat. Thus,
     losing body water would not be as detrimental to someone in this
     situation. It is not (A) because this does not address the specifics of
     someone exercising in cold conditions. It is not (B) because cold
     would not affect whether someone could take supplements. It is not
     (C) because the factor in question is cold, not body mass index.
13. (A) We do not know the precise makeup of the client’s portfolio, so we
     can consider the potential impacts of each of the possible switches. If
     we check the answers against the table, we can see the biggest drop in
     variance, and thus the biggest drop in risk, occurs as stocks owned go
     from one to two. This change cuts the variance nearly in half. The
     other choices still decrease the risk, but not by as much as choice (A).
14. (A) The text argues that Sweden has done a great job at political
     compromise over the years, with stakeholders from a variety of
     backgrounds in society able to successfully find common ground.
     This point is emphasized in the last sentence, in which the narrator
     draws a contrast between the near uniformity of private industry
     ownership (which would lead one to think that business would have a
     greater influence than labor on outcomes) and showing how labor
     disputes can be settled in a way that involves all interested parties.
     Choice (A) best accomplishes this goal by showing that workers and
     management both trust in the government managed settlement. It is
     not choice (B) because this would involve a one-sided deal for
     business. It is not (C) because that would not necessarily indicate
     compromise. It is not (D) because such actions would show the failure
     of compromise.
15. (C) This is the only option that correctly uses an apostrophe after
     “workers” to show that there are plural workers who own passports
     and visas. Choice (A) incorrectly shows that the visas and passports
     possess something. Choice (B) does not show possession at all.
     Choice (D) uses singular possession by putting the apostrophe before
     the “s.”
16. (A) Choice (A) puts the words in the most logical sequence, clearly
     stating the subject of “scientific method” and following with the
     description of it. The other options all put the words in an illogical
     order.
17. (A) The adjectives “loveable” and “fluffy” can have their order
     reversed and the sentence would still be logical, so it is appropriate to
     separate them with a comma, as in choice (A). Choice (B) lacks a
     comma, choice (C) is too choppy, and choice (D) provides too large of
     an interruption at this point.
18. (C) Choice (C) correctly uses a colon to come before the clarification
     of who makes up the two players. Choices (A), (B), and (D) have
     unnecessary punctuation breaking up the two-part clarification.
19. (C) “Struck” correctly provides the past tense conjugation of
     “strike”—this means that the law was overturned. The other options
     do not provide a proper past tense conjugation of “strike.”
20. (D) This option provides a comma before the dependent clause that
     starts with “which.” Choices (A) and (B) do not provide this comma,
     and choice (C) does not have a complete sentence after the semicolon.
21. (C) The subject here is “a struggle,” which is a singular noun. We
     need a singular verb to match. “Does” is the correct answer—it is the
     only singular verb out of the choices. “Do” is a plural verb in this
     context, “doing” leads to gibberish, and “have done” uses the
     incorrect tense.
22. (D) Choice (D) is the only option to correctly place commas around
     the transitional word “however.” This choice also correctly uses a
     colon to come before a clarification.
23. (D) “Thus” means “therefore,” and is logical at this point since the
     previous sentence discusses how humans follow their instincts in
     seeking out a meditative state, and the current sentence elaborates on
     the poem’s symbolism. Choices (A) and (C) would introduce new
     ideas most likely in a list, and choice (B) would be used to show a
     contrast.
24. (D) The text starts by highlighting Chancourtois’s important
     contribution to chemistry. It then goes on to state that because of some
     minor errors and differences in terminology, his discovery was mainly
     ignored. Since the author is speaking about Chancourtois’s discovery
     in a positive light, it would make sense to say that it was
     “unfortunate” that his discovery was ignored. It is not
     “simultaneously” since the text goes on to talk about the future, which
     would not be simultaneous to Chancourtois. It is not “moreover”
     because this is not a continuation of an idea. It is not “naturally”
     because with all the unusual circumstances surrounding the way
     Chancourtois set up his table, it would not be logical to describe it as
     “natural.”
25. (C) The student’s goal is to show why it was difficult to find
     information about the Hunley during the 20th century. Since the ship
     remained submerged until the beginning of the 21st century, it makes
     sense that there would be little information about it. It is not choice
     (A) because the ship was not destroyed. It is not (B) because this
     would be an accurate assertion about recent discoveries, but not about
     ones during the 20th century. It is not choice (D) because this is not
     directly related to the student’s goal.
26. (D) Choice (D) is the only option that mentions specialized
     terminology as it relates to genealogical records—“consanguineous”
     and “affinal.” None of the other options mentions specialized
     terminology.
27. (B) The student’s goal is to suggest something that could be done to do
     a comparative analysis of how effective certain antibiotics are. Choice
     (B) is the only option that provides a direct comparison between two
     antibiotics and their effectiveness. Choice (A) provides a comparison
     but not of antibiotics. Choice (C) is rather vague. Choice (D) focuses
     on history instead of biological analysis.

Section 2, Module 1: Math
 1. (B)




 2. (C) Take two clearly identifiable points from the line: (0, 1) and (−2,
    −2). The slope is the change in y divided by the change in x:




 3. (2) Make things as easy as possible to solve for this expression:
    simply take half of the equation to find the value of −5 + 6x.
4. (A) Manipulate the equation to isolate the height of the cylinder:



   Divide both sides by πr2 →




   This corresponds to choice (A).
5. (C) The voter turnout in the year 2008 was nearly 62 percent, making
   it the highest turnout for any of the years presented in the graph.
6. (C)




7. (D) All three of the angles will add up to 180, so set up an equation to
   solve for x:




   Since ∠CED is equal to 3x, multiply 3 by 20 to find the measure of
   the angle:



8. (1) Take the cube root of both sides of the equation, then solve for x:
 9. (B) The number of diners who ordered a dessert is 50. Out of those 50,
    there were 15 diners who ordered an appetizer. Solve for the
    probability that a diner who ordered a dessert also ordered an
    appetizer by dividing 15 by 50:




10.             The x-intercept of the equation is found when the y value of
      the point equals 0. So, plug 0 in for y to solve for the x-coordinate of
      the x-intercept.




11. (B) The line is already in slope-intercept form, y = mx + b, in which
     the b represents the y-intercept. So, the y-intercept is −2.
12.                Use substitution to solve for y. Since             . Plug
      2y in for x into the first equation:




13. (D) All of the options have a y value of 0. So, look at what values of x
     will cause there to be a y value of 0, since a point that intersects the x
     axis must have a y value of 0. In y = (x + 4) (x − 5) x, if x is 0, −4, or
     5, the entire right side of the equation would be 0. Therefore, all three
     options would be points at which the function intersects the x axis.
14. (C) The initial number of the bacteria can be found when you plug 0 in
     for h, since when h = 0 no time has passed.



    Now, determine the value of h that would be needed to find a number
    of bacteria that is 8 times the initial value of 1,000: 8 × 1000 = 8000.




    Since 8 is equal to 2 cubed, the correct value for h in this situation is 3
    hours. If you do not remember that 8 is equal to 2 cubed, you could
    also plug in the answer choices to solve.
15. (D) The spins that had total values of 6 or less are bolded and
     italicized below:


                                        Number of Spins with That Total
     Total of Combined Spins                        Value
                  2                                       1
                  3                                       2
                  4                                       2
                  5                                       4
                  6                                       5
                  7                                       6
                  8                                       7
                  9                                       4
                  10                                      3
                  11                                      4
                  12                                      2
     Out of the 40 total turns, there is therefore a total of 1 + 2 + 2 + 4 + 5
     = 14 turns in which Pete has a total of 6 or less. Find the fraction of
     the combined spins as follows:




16. (D) Since the Mexico City area represented 17% of the total
     population of Mexico, solve for the total population of Mexico, x, by
     using this equation:




17. (12) Plug 5 in for x to solve for f (5):




18. (D) The solution set of the two inequalities y > x + 1 and y < − 2x − 3
     and the quadrants of the coordinate plane are graphed below:
     So, the solution set is in quadrants 2 and 3 only.
19. (C) The computer costs $2,000 and goes down by the same amount
     each year. After 6 years, the total amount of depreciation is 2000 −
     800 = 1200. So, to find the annual amount of depreciation, take 1200
     and divide it by              .
20. (A) A circle with a center at (3, 4) that intersects at the origin, (0, 0)
     would look like this:
    To find the radius, notice that you can inscribe a special 3-4-5 right
    triangle as shown above. The radius is therefore 5. The equation of a
    circle is (x − h)2 + (y − k)2 = r2, in which (h, k) represents the center,
    and r represents the radius. Plug in (3, 4) for the center and 5 for the
    radius to find the answer:




21. (D) Find how many minutes there are in 16 hours:
    Then, since Susan blinks 20 times per minute while awake, multiply
    20 by 960 to find the total number of times she will blink:



22. (D) Hugo spends $400 a month on miscellaneous expenses. If he cut
     this expense by half and allocates all that he has cut to his savings, his
     savings would increase by $200 a month. Hugo is trying to allocate
     more money into savings. Now, calculate how large of an increase this
     additional $200 would be relative to the $250 he is currently saving:




    So, he would increase his monthly savings by 80% if he were to make
    this change.

Section 2, Module 2: Math
 1. (A) Plug −2 in for x and solve:




 2. (A) The answers are all written in slope-intercept form, and they all
    have different slopes. So, calculate the slope of the linear function by
    using two points. We can use (6, 0) and (9, 1) since there is no
    negative value in the point, which could more easily lead to a careless
    error:




    The only option with a slope of     is choice (A),              .

 3. (C)
4. (B) First, use the ordered pair (8, 16) to solve for the value of the
   constant a:




   Now, plug −3 in for y to the function that has the constant a as 2:




   So, the answer is choice (B).
5. (B) Match the constants with the corresponding numbers on the other
   side of the equation. a equals 2, b equals 16, and c equals 32. Add
   these numbers together to find the sum of a, b, and c:



6. (A) In the function S(w) = 500 + 10w, when zero weeks have gone by,
   the value of w will be 0. Plugging 0 into the function for w, the
   amount of money she will have in her savings account will be 500.
   This represents how much money she has in the account when no
   weeks have gone by, so it corresponds to choice (A), the money that is
   in her account at the beginning of the time period. Profit corresponds
   to revenue minus expenses, and the slope of 10 corresponds to the
   weekly increase in money in the account.
7. (54) The width of 2 inches on the map corresponds to 6 miles in actual
   distance, and the length of 3 inches on the map corresponds to 9 miles
   in actual distance. So, multiply 6 by 9 to find the actual area of the
   rectangular plot of land:
 8. (C) The total amount of time that it took Samara to complete the trip
    is 4 + 6 = 10 hours. Use the equation Distance = Rate × Time to work
    with this problem. The problem asks for the average speed, which
    corresponds to the rate. Using that equation, the               . Use
    400 for the distance and 10 for the time to solve for the average rate
    over the entire trip:




 9. (B) Since the triangles are similar to one another, the ratios of the
    sides will be the same. So, the tangent of angle C will be the same as
    the tangent of angle F. The tangent of angle F is the opposite side ED
    divided by the adjacent side             . This corresponds to choice
    (B).
10. (C) Based on the best-fit line that could connect the points, the amount
     that the value of an airplane decreases each year is approximately
     $5,000. Since the initial cost of the airplane is approximately
     $100,000, divide 100,000 by 5,000 to estimate when the plane value
     will closely approximate 0 dollars:




    So, 20 years after purchase the plane will closely approximate a value
    of 0 dollars.
 11. (D) 400% of x is 4x. This must be added to the original value of x to
    find the total value when x is increased by 400%: 4x + x = 5x.
12. (C)
     Since the rectangles are similar to one another, the sides are
     proportional. Therefore, the ratio of EF to FG will be the same as the
     ratio of BC to AB. Call x the length of side EF, and set up a proportion
     to solve:




     Since AEFG is a rectangle, there will be two sides of length 15 and
     two sides of length 10. Find the perimeter of the rectangle by adding
     the lengths of all these sides together:



13. (A) A line with the form y = k will simply be a horizontal line. Since
     the constant k is greater than zero, it will not intersect the x axis at all,
     and will therefore have no zeros. For example, consider the equation y
     = 2. The graph of this line is given below:
     As you can see, the line is horizontal and will never intersect the x-
     axis.
14. (3) The combined set of both classes will have a total of 40 students,
     since there are 20 students in each class. So, the median of the set of
     both classes will be between the 20th and 21st terms when the
     numbers are put in order from least to greatest. There are a total of 18
     values that are 2 or less, and then there are 9 values that are 3. So, the
     20th and 21st terms will both be 3, making 3 the median of the
     combined set of scores.
15. (D) What would be the value(s) of x that would be a solution or
     solutions to this equation?
    Now, check to be sure this solution is not extraneous by plugging 2
    back into the original equation:




    This is undefined, so there are no solutions to the equation.
16. (C) The vertex in a parabola of the form y = a (x − h)2 + k is (h, k). In
     the parabola with the equation y = (x − 6)2, the value of h is 6 and the
     value of k is 0. So, the vertex of the parabola is (6, 0).
17. (B) 14 out of the 44 people to serve as president of the United States
     prior to 2020 had previously been vice president. So, of the
     presidents had been vice presidents. Set up an equation expressing
     this as follows:




    Therefore, the answer is choice (B).
18. (144) For the equations to have infinitely many solutions, they must be
     multiples of one another. Rearrange the equations so that the x and y
     terms match:
     Notice that −3 is 12 times     and that 2 is 12 times . So, multiply
     the 12 from the first equation by 12 to find the value of a in the second
     equation:



     So, a = 144.
19. (D) Given that J stands for the number of people from Julian’s side of
     the family and that M stands for the number of people from Maria’s
     side of the family, the first inequality should be M + J > 200, since
     they want to have more than 200 people in attendance. The second
     inequality represents the costs. The total cost for the reception should
     be less than $18,000, and the cost for each invited guest is $40. So,
     the second inequality should be 40(M + J) < 18,000 to model this
     relationship. These two inequalities correspond to choice (D).
20. (B) Use unit analysis to cancel out the necessary terms and convert the
     value to the required terms:




21. (43) Since there are 360 degrees in a circle, the sector designated by
     ∠ACB represents         of the total area of the circle. The area for this
     circle is found using the formula π r2, and the radius of the circle is 7.
     So, multiply the area of the circle by the fraction of the area that the
     sector represents to find the sector’s area:
    This would be rounded to an area of 43, since that is the nearest whole
    square unit.
22. (C) Use C to represent the number of cups of coffee Shantiel
     purchased, and T to represent the number of cups of tea purchased.
     Set up a system of equations to solve for C. First, since the number of
     cups of coffee is half the number of cups of tea, one equation would
     be        . The second equation represents the milligrams of caffeine.
     Since there are 95 milligrams in each cup of coffee and 26 milligrams
     in each cup of tea, the equation would be 95C + 26T = 735. Solve for
     C by using substitution from the first equation:




    Now substitute 2C in for T into the second equation, then solve for C:




    So, she purchased 5 cups of coffee, which corresponds to choice (C).
                 PART 7
Practice Test 3: Adaptive
Adaptive Test Overview

You are about to take an Adaptive SAT Practice Test. This will simulate the
section-adaptive format of the Digital SAT. Depending on your performance
on the first module of each section, you will have a more difficult or less
difficult second module of each section. (In order to maximize your
potential practice material, there are no overlapping questions in any of the
modules—i.e., if you do Reading and Writing Module 2B, for example, you
can still go back and try Reading and Writing Module 2A for a later
practice exercise.) The format of the test is outlined in the table below. You
can use a calculator throughout the math section. Good luck!


            SAT Module                                Format
 Reading and Writing Module 1           32 Minutes, 27 Questions,
                                        Standard Difficulty
                                        ________________
                                        Score the module after completion
                                        to determine whether you do 2A
                                        or 2B.
 Reading and Writing Module 2A          32 Minutes, 27 Questions,
 or 2B                                  Adaptive Difficulty
                                        ________________
                                        If you get 17 or fewer questions
                                        correct on the first module, do the
                                        less challenging Module 2A.
                                        ________________
                                        If you get 18 or more questions
                                        correct on the first module, do the
                                       more challenging Module 2B.
                          Break—10 Minutes
Math Module 1                          35 Minutes, 22 Questions,
                                       Standard Difficulty
                                       ________________
                                       Score the module after completion
                                       to determine whether you do 2A
                                       or 2B.
Math Module 2A or 2B                   35 Minutes, 22 Questions,
                                       Adaptive Difficulty
                                       ________________
                                       If you get 13 or fewer questions
                                       correct on the first module, do the
                                       less challenging Module 2A.
                                       ________________
                                       If you get 14 or more questions
                                       correct on the first module, do the
                                       more challenging Module 2B


                               TEST TIP
For helpful features the Digital SAT provides while taking the test,
please refer to the Introduction at the beginning of this book and the
labeled screenshots provided.
Practice Test 3: Adaptive

Section 1, Module 1: Reading and Writing
32 MINUTES, 27 QUESTIONS


DIRECTIONS
             You will be tested on a variety of important reading and writing skills. Each question
             has one or more passages, possibly including a graph or table. Carefully read each
             passage and question and choose the best answer to the question based on the
             passage(s).
             Every question in this section is multiple-choice, with four possible answers. Each
             question has only one best answer.




Even if a person does “make it” by creating original content and
__________ a viewer base, a career as an influencer is not very stable.
Recent changes to an Internet company’s monetization algorithm had
thousands of short video creators up in arms as they saw profits plummet
with no explanation from the platform.

 1
Which choice completes the text with the most logical and precise word or
phrase?

        manufacturing
        fabricating
        escalating
        building

Born in 1644 during the Tokugawa period (also known as the Edo period),
Matsuo Bashō became interested in poetry and literature after going to
Ueno Castle and being in the ________ the lord’s son.

 2
Which choice completes the text with the most logical and precise word or
phrase?

        company of
        incorporation of
        commerce of
        profession as

Scientists found a way to avoid the negative impact of chemical selectivity
by implementing a more controlled reaction process. Scientists ________
the benzene reaction to produce a product like what they originally
intended, but one that did not add multiple sidechains to the benzene ring.
This technique came to be known as Friedel-Crafts Acylation, a now widely
used technique in the production of benzene-containing products.

 3
Which choice completes the text with the most logical and precise word or
phrase?

        modified
        expunged
        ousted
        proposed
In his most recent, Words Without Music, Glass discusses his influences,
beginning with his Jewish father who ran a record shop in Baltimore. His
father’s love for Schubert, Shostakovich, and Bartók ______ in Glass a love
for music; by the time he was fifteen years old, he had become the classical-
music buyer for the record shop.

 4
Which choice completes the text with the most logical and precise word or
phrase?

        took
        spurred
        used
        inspire

During transcription, nucleotides are polymerized into a strand of mRNA
whose sequence is complementary to that of the template DNA. This “pre-
mRNA” typically contains several regions of non-coding material, or
“introns,” that must be excised prior to translation of the protein-coding
regions, which are referred to as “exons.” In a complex process known as
splicing, the introns are extracted and degraded, while the adjacent ends of
exons are adjoined, and trafficked out of the nucleus to the endoplasmic
reticulum, where protein synthesis can at last begin.

 5
As used in the text, what does the word “excised” most nearly mean?

        Removed
        Translated
        Coded
        Mutated
A third of all Fortune 500 CEOs possess liberal arts degrees. LEAP, or
Liberal Education & America’s Promise, is an initiative launched by the
Association of American Colleges & Universities to emphasize the
importance of a 21st-century liberal arts education for individuals and a
nation “dependent on economic creativity and democratic vitality.”
According to LEAP’s recent national survey, 93% of employers say that “a
demonstrated capacity to think critically, communicate clearly, and solve
complex problems is more important than undergraduate major.” You’ve
guessed it—these three skill sets are the unifying objective of liberal arts
programs nationwide.

 6
Which choice best describes the overall structure of the text?

         The writer explains the outline of a liberal arts curriculum.
         The writer begins with a historical survey and ends with a financial
          analysis.
         The writer considers expert opinions, then refutes these opinions
          with statistical evidence.
         The writer introduces an initiative, then justifies its economic
          relevance.

Text 1
As online education becomes accredited and archives make it easy for
employers to see students’ work and achievements, open online education is
in position to overtake its predecessor. Digital credentials, reputable
degrees, and professional certificates mean that employers cannot only rest
assured that employees have extensive training and knowledge, but will
also, for the first time, be able to effortlessly glimpse academic
accomplishments, rather than try to decipher the meaningless acronyms on
standardized transcripts.

Text 2
The open educational movement really took off in 2008; and, within just a
few short years, providers like Coursera, Udacity, and edX emerged among
hundreds of other self-paced, virtual education platforms, including the
immensely popular Khan Academy, that offer quality learning at a great
price, free. Now, students could enjoy learning outside of a formal
education environment with asynchronous and unconstrained access to free
content.

 7
Based on the texts, what would the author of Text 1 most likely say about
Text 2’s characterization of the open educational movement?

          It underscores a threat to the quality level of online educational
           offerings, presaging a loss of recognition for online credentials.
          It addresses the major objection to in-person educational programs,
           given the clear link between free programming and professional
           certifications.
          It demonstrates that while more people have access to free
           offerings on the Internet, there are fewer opportunities for
           businesses to profit from these developments.
          It shows that barriers to online education have been reduced, likely
           enhancing the popularity of online certifications.

The following text is from is Walt Whitman’s 1881 poem “No Labor-
Saving Machine.”

     No labor-saving machine,
     Nor discovery have I made;
     Nor will I be able to leave behind me any wealthy bequest to found a
     hospital or library,
     Nor reminiscence of any deed of courage, for America,
     Nor literary success, nor intellect—nor book for the book-shelf;
     Only a few carols, vibrating through the air, I leave,
     For comrades and lovers.

 8
What is the main idea of the text?

          Practical achievement is inherently better than transcendental
           creation.
          The narrator prioritizes human connection over more visible
           success.
          American success is synonymous with literary accomplishments.
          Technology is inherently necessary to musical advancement.

The following text is adapted from James Joyce’s 1914 story “An
Encounter.” A young, unnamed narrator searches for release from the
constraints of daily routine.

     It was Joe Dillon who introduced the Wild West to us. He had a little
     library made up of old numbers of The Union Jack, Pluck, and The
     Halfpenny Marvel. Every evening after school we met in his back
     garden and arranged [battles]. He and his . . . brother Leo, the idler, held
     the loft of the stable while we tried to carry it by storm; or we fought a
     pitched battle on the grass. But, however well we fought, we never won
     siege or battle and all our bouts ended with Joe Dillon’s . . . dance of
     victory. His parents went to eight-o’clock mass every morning in
     Gardiner Street and the peaceful odor of Mrs. Dillon was prevalent in
     the hall of the house. But he played too fiercely for us who were
     younger and more timid.

 9
Based on the text, Joe Dillon’s personality is mostly

          accommodating.
        forceful.
        compromising.
        dishonest.
“How Like a Winter My Absence Hath Been” is a 1609 poem by William
Shakespeare. In the poem, the narrator addresses an unseen person,
expressing his longing for them. An English teacher claims that the narrator
expresses a deep personal feeling of melancholy: _________

 10
Which quotation from the poem most effectively illustrates the claim?

        “What freezings have I felt, what dark days seen! / What old
         December’s bareness everywhere!”
        “And yet this time removed was summer’s time; / The teeming
         autumn, big with rich increase,”
        “For summer and his pleasures wait on thee, / And, thou away, the
         very birds are mute:”
        And thou away, the very birds are mute: / Or, if they sing, ’tis with
         so dull a cheer,”

Immobility has many harmful effects on the human body, ranging from
bone degradation to cardiac atrophy. This is often seen in astronauts who
return from space. Even with workout equipment and hours of exercise
completed, astronauts still suffer from cardiac atrophy as a response to
immobility. During hibernation, bears do not experience cardiac atrophy—
unraveling how bears can combat the harmful effects of long periods of
immobilization could provide numerous benefits in human medicine.
Therefore, research about bear hibernation will lead to significant
applications for human astronauts in the quest to minimize the negative
effects of long immobility.

 11
Which of the following, if true, would most directly undermine the author’s
hypothesis?

        Bears are found to have more success than humans in reducing
         their muscle atrophy over extended periods of time.
        Humans are unable to enter a state of hibernation like bears can.
        Astronauts who performed no exercise while travelling in a
         spacecraft experienced greater muscle atrophy than astronauts
         who did exercise.
        Bears that are placed in orbit in a spacecraft had a similar level of
         muscle atrophy as did humans in the same spacecraft.




Organic crops have become increasingly popular with consumers who seek
out food raised without chemical pesticides. Many consumers, however, are
deterred from purchasing organic crops due to the increased costs. A
consumer researcher claims that the prices of organic crops can often be
substantially higher than those of conventionally raised crops:
___________

 12
Which choice most effectively uses data from the graph to complete the
example?

        The prices of both conventional wheat and organic corn remained
         largely constant between 2010 and 2014.
        The price of organic soybeans was approximately twice that of
         conventional soybeans between 2010 and 2014.
        While organic soybeans may be rather expensive, organic wheat
        was only around 9 dollars a bushel throughout the years 2010 to
        2014.
        Organically grown fruits and vegetables are likely much more
         expensive than organically grown grains.

Daisy Bates was the president of the Arkansas State Conference of the
NAACP in the 1950s. She wrote a letter to NAACP executive secretary
Roy Wilkins on December 17, 1957, about the situation in the Little Rock
schools, which had recently been required to comply with the recent
decision by the federal government to integrate schools. She wanted to
convince school officials that schools should integrate in a safe manner.

 13
Which selection from the letter from Daisy Bates best indicates that she
succeeded in convincing school officials of her point of view?

        “We strongly challenged this statement, which he denied making in
         that fashion.”
        “We also pointed out that the treatment of the children had been
         getting steadily worse for the last two weeks in the form of
         kicking, spitting, and general abuse.”
        “As a result of our visit, stronger measures are being taken against
         the white students who are guilty of committing these offenses.
         For instance, a boy who had been suspended for two weeks, . . .
         on his return to school, the first day he knocked Gloria Rey into
          her locker. As a result of our visit, he was given an indefinite
          suspension.”
         “[The president] has stated his willingness to come down and
          address the student body if invited by student leaders of the
          school. This information was passed on to the principal of the
          school, but we have not been assured that leadership would be
          given to children in the school who are willing to organize for law
          and order.”




The electoral college system in the United States is used to select electors
who then select the winner of the U.S. Presidency. A shortcoming of this
system is that it is quite difficult for third parties to have their voices heard
since it is a “winner-take-all” system. A political scientist claims that a
major plus of the electoral college, on the other hand, is that even if a
candidate only secures a plurality of the popular vote, they will end up with
a majority of the electoral vote, contributing to the country unifying around
a single leader.

 14
Which choice best describes data from the table that support the political
scientist’s claim?

         In the 1912 presidential election, five major candidates
          participated, together earning nearly 100% of the total votes cast.
        The Socialist and Prohibition parties had a strong showing in the
         1912 presidential election, together earning over 6% of the
         popular votes cast.
        In the 1912 presidential election, Woodrow Wilson secured only
         41.83% of the popular vote but won 81.9% of the electoral vote.
        Teddy Roosevelt came up short in his quest for the 1912
         presidency, earning only 16.6% of the electoral votes.

Motivation is something that drives someone to do something. Intrinsic
motivators arise from the individual. Extrinsic motivators are outside forces
acting upon an individual. Examples of intrinsic motivators are personal
enjoyment, self-fulfillment, and having fun. These examples could be
observed in real life as dancing because you like it, reading a book about a
topic of personal interest, or journaling because it helps organize thoughts.
Examples of extrinsic motivators are money, avoiding consequences, and
getting something valued in return for doing something. These examples
could be observed in real life as promising a child a toy for taking medicine,
going to work to earn money, or ____________

 15
Which choice most logically completes the text?

        contemplating the meaning of a painting for personal enjoyment.
        watching movies on a streaming service.
        following the law to avoid being arrested.
        going on a vacation to a place on your bucket list.

People have different opinions on the key to success. Being successful is
not a single-person act. __________ needs others in order to succeed and
thrive.

 16
Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the conventions of
Standard English?

        It may, seem unfair, but everyone
        It may seem unfair but, everyone
        It may seem unfair, but everyone
        It may seem unfair but everyone

Cats have woven ______ way throughout much of human history. The
earliest evidence of a cat being kept as a pet comes from a grave in Cyprus
dated to about 9,500 years ago in which a cat was buried with its owner,
likely out of love and respect for the animal.

 17
Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the conventions of
Standard English?

        its
        it’s
        there
        their

The job search can be very frustrating for people who don’t realize a key
element in most ________ you know, it’s whom you know. This old axiom
is true in hiring discussions across the United States.

 18
Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the conventions of
Standard English?

        hiring processes, its not what
        hiring processes, it’s not what
        hiring processes; its not, what
        hiring processes: it’s not what

Hugo Ball, a writer from Zürich, Switzerland, founded the Dada movement
in 1916 as a means of expressing his view that the war started due to
societal collapse. It is believed that Ball’s Dada movement ________ after a
meeting with his Cabaret Voltaire: a Zürich-based group of artists and
individuals against the war.

 19
Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the conventions of
Standard English?

        taking off
        has taken off
        took off
        taking of

During the process of photorespiration, there is a release of carbon dioxide,
a consumption of oxygen, and no chemical energy or food is produced. As a
result, photorespiration is considered to be a waste of energy—it does not
_____________

 20
Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the conventions of
Standard English?

        provide the organism; with the food it needs to thrive.
        provide the organism, with the food it needs to thrive.
        provide, the organism with the food, it needs to thrive.
        provide the organism with the food it needs to thrive.

The crassulacean acid metabolism (CAM) photosynthetic process is an
unusual plant adaptation that ________ plants to photosynthesize during the
day and perform carbon fixation at night.

 21
Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the conventions of
Standard English?

        enabled
        enabling
        enables
        have enabled

Like with other artistic pursuits, arguably the best training comes from
working as an apprentice with a master of the craft. Aspiring chefs may set
up ____________ a cook to learn new cooking methods from a highly
respected professional.

 22
Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the conventions of
Standard English?

        a “stage” an unpaid internship, with      a “stage”—an unpaid
         internship—with         a “stage” an unpaid internship with   a
         “stage”—an unpaid internship: with While hunting, platypuses
         store their prey in their cheeks and break down their food using
         gravel or dirt from the water _______ they have grinding plates in
         their bills instead of teeth.

 23
Which choice completes the text with the most logical transition?

        while
        whenever
        but
        since

Soap does not kill just bacteria that are fatal to humans. ________ it works
as an agent to remove all germs. Therefore, humans who over-wash have
much less exposure to relatively harmless germs that their immune systems
should be able to fend off.

 24
Which choice completes the text with the most logical transition?

        Also,
        Granted,
        Instead,
        Additionally,

While researching a topic, a student has taken the following notes:
    Dayton, a city in southwest Ohio, is the birthplace of many inventions.
    Wilbur and Orville Wright, residents of Dayton, conducted aviation
    research and experiments and developed the first successful motor-
    powered airplane.
    The self-starter for cars was also invented in Dayton by Charles F.
    Kettering, allowing motorists to stop hand cranking their vehicles.
    The ice cube tray with a quick release mechanism is another Dayton
    invention. Before this innovation, ice cubes couldn’t be released from
    the tray without a soak in hot water.
    The Boolean search method and the pop top for soda cans were also
    invented in Dayton.

 25
The student wants to present general information about Dayton to an
audience unfamiliar with it. Which choice most effectively uses relevant
information from the notes to accomplish this goal?
         The quick release mechanism on the ice cube tray is a useful
          invention, since prior to its creation, ice cubes would have to be
          removed from a tray using hot water.
         Charles Kettering, a Dayton resident, was a key figure in the
          development of automotive technology.
         Southwest Ohio city Dayton is the home of many useful inventions
          in fields ranging from aviation to consumer goods.
         Without the contributions of Wilbur and Orville Wright, the
         famous inventors of the airplane, Dayton would not have the
         renown it presently does.

While researching a topic, a student has taken the following notes:
      Many people think piranhas are extremely dangerous animals that
      regularly eat people.
      There are many different types of piranhas and some are vegetarians.
      The most common type, the red-bellied piranha, is carnivorous.
      Like sharks, piranhas have an excellent sense of small and carnivorous
      piranhas are attracted by blood.
      Piranhas live in groups and in murky water. When one piranha takes a
      bite of food, it signals to nearby piranhas that there is food.
      Researchers have found that piranhas exhibit shoaling behavior for
      their own safety against predators and to protect their nests.

 26
The student wants to correct a misconception that piranhas exclusively eat
animals. Which choice most effectively uses relevant information from the
notes to accomplish this goal?

         Despite popular understanding, there are in fact some varieties of
          piranhas that only eat plants.
         Piranhas are fiercely protective of their habitats, especially their
          nests.
         While many think that piranhas eat only meat, they also are avid
         consumers of blood.
         Even though piranhas are primarily carnivorous, this is actually not
          supported by the latest research.

While conducting research, a student took these notes:
      Some astronomers have long warned of the dangers of a large asteroid
      strike on Earth.
      It has long been hypothesized that asteroid impact could lead to the
      extinction of hundreds if not thousands of species of animals.
      Many scientists have studied the idea of predicting and avoiding
      asteroid impact, but few definitive strategies have emerged.
      Everything from lasers to bombs have been suggested as possible ways
      to change the trajectory of a near-impact asteroid.
      In 2022, NASA crashed a spacecraft into small asteroid, succeeding in
      modifying its orbit.

 27
The student wants to suggest a constructive strategy to the “astronomers” as
mentioned in the notes. Which choice most effectively uses relevant
information from the notes to accomplish this goal?

         Since an asteroid will inevitably lead to demise of life on Earth,
          humans should proceed in earnest to colonize other worlds.
         Given the possible threat from a large asteroid strike, researchers
          should build upon the success of NASA’s asteroid orbital
          modification.
         The militarization of space with lasers and bombs is necessary to
          prevent the extinction of many species of animals.
         Concern about an asteroid impact on Earth is unwarranted given
          the latest scientific predictions about its likelihood.
                           ANSWER KEY
              Practice Test 3: Adaptive

Section 1, Module 1: Reading and Writing
 1.   D
 2.   A
 3.   A
 4.   B
 5.   A
 6.   D
 7.   D
 8.   B
 9.   B
10. A
11. D
12. B
13. C
14. C
15. C
16. C
17. D
18. D
19. C
20. D
21. C
22. B
23. D
24. C
25. C
26. A
27. B


Total Correct Answers: _____ / 27

Did you get 17 or fewer questions correct? If so, move to Reading
and Writing Module 2A on page 759.

Did you get 18 or more questions correct? If so, move to Reading
and Writing Module 2B on page 769.
Section 1, Module 2A: Reading and Writing
32 MINUTES, 27 QUESTIONS


DIRECTIONS
             You will be tested on a variety of important reading and writing skills. Each question
             has one or more passages, possibly including a graph or table. Carefully read each
             passage and question and choose the best answer to the question based on the
             passage(s).
             Every question in this section is multiple-choice, with four possible answers. Each
             question has only one best answer.




Juan was surprised by what he heard but ________ the information as lies.
He knew many of his peers were jealous of his success, but he doubted they
would stoop so low.

 1
Which choice completes the text with the most logical and precise word or
phrase?

        reduced
        forgot
        conceded
        dismissed

Unique markings allow the servals to blend into the waving grasses on the
savannahs where they make their homes. Camouflaging into their habitat
allows servals to approach their favorite prey without being _______

 2
Which choice completes the text with the most logical and precise word or
phrase?

        pictured.
        envisioned.
        ignored.
        detected.

When the speaker was done, the crowd rose and clapped vigorously. Yet, at
the question-and-answer session, attentive spectators ______ several points
—particularly that the speech’s moral lesson came off as condescending and
was generally unfounded.

 3
Which choice completes the text with the most logical and precise word or
phrase?

        increased
        elevated
        raised
        nourished

A promising alternative fuel source is biodiesel. Biodiesel is made from
animal fats, plant fats, and even used grease from restaurants. The glycerol
backbone is removed from the fat, breaking the fat into three different
chains, which are then reacted with an alcohol to form the biodiesel. This
type of chemical reaction is called a transesterification.

 4
As used in the text, what does the word “breaking” most nearly mean?
          Flouting
          Eliminating
          Separating
          Categorizing

After platypuses first appeared in Australia about 100 million years ago,
they took over the country’s ______ however, when marsupials appeared in
Australia 54 to 71 million years ago, they became the country’s dominant
species everywhere but in the water.

 5
Which choice completes the text with the most logical and precise word or
phrase?

          panorama;
          perspective;
          landscape;
          agriculture;

Great Expectations is an 1861 novel by Charles Dickens. In the story, Pip, a
poor orphan who is cared for by his sister and her husband, meets the young
girl who will become the lifetime object of his affections while
simultaneously becoming aware of his lowly position in the British class
system.

     For a long time I went once a week to this strange, gloomy house—it
     was called Satis House—and once Estella told me I might kiss her.
     And then Miss Havisham decided I was to be apprenticed to Joe, and
     gave him £25 for the purpose; and I left off going to see her, and helped
     Joe in the forge. But I didn’t like Joe’s trade, and I was afflicted by that
     most miserable thing—to feel ashamed of home.

 6
As used in the text, what does the word “afflicted” most nearly mean?

          Diseased
          Strengthened
          Emboldened
          Troubled

Unlike other viruses for which vaccines are available—several of which,
through tenacious public health efforts, have been eradicated worldwide—
influenza remains a perennial menace, and due to the unique nature of its
genome, is unlikely to ever be completely conquered.

 7
Which choice best states the main purpose of the text?

          To express that influenza will continue to be a threat despite
           scientific advances     To argue that influenza can be fully
           eradicated with sufficient research funding      To highlight how
           influenza is unique among diseases in the severity of its
           symptoms       To celebrate that influenza has been eliminated as a
           pervasive threat to humanity The following text is adapted from
           Elizabeth Cady Stanton’s 1867 address to the Judiciary
           Committees of the legislature of New York. She argued for the
           right of Black men and all women to vote in the election of
           delegates to the Constitutional Convention.

     The wheel of progress moves onward, and man must, in the nature of
     things, throw off old customs, creeds and codes, as the snake sheds its
     skin in the new growth, and from the dead letters of the past, emerge
     into higher civilization. History shows that each generation has been
     marked by some new idea, alike tending to the greater freedom and
     equality of man; and those who, in their blindness or folly, have tried to
     block this onward march, have invariably been ground to powder. We
     see a signal instance of this in the summary manner in which an
     indignant people have ridden rough-shod over Andrew Johnson and his
     satellites—showing that even the head of a nation is nothing, but as he
     represents the leading ideas of his generation. They only are immortal
     who link the future to the past and roll on the triumphal car of progress
     to the brighter and the better day.

 8
Which choice best states the main idea of the text?

          Recent events have demonstrated the inability of Andrew Johnson
           to effectively lead the United States.
          The march toward equality is inevitable and leaders should
           embrace, rather than fight, the coming changes.
          Those who stand in the way of social progress should instead
           redouble their efforts to maintain the status quo.
          The examples of harmonious animals in nature should inspire
           humans to create a more just society.

In the 1954 U.S. Supreme Court case Brown v. Board of Education,
American schools were legally desegregated. In making this decision, the
court observed that minority students at segregated schools were usually
educationally disadvantaged relative to students at integrated schools.

 9
Which quotation from the court’s decision best illustrates the court’s
observation?

          “In each instance, they had been denied admission to schools
           attended by white children”
          “[In prior cases it was held that] equality of treatment is accorded
           when the races are provided substantially equal facilities even
           though these facilities be separate . . .”
         “Segregation with the sanction of law, therefore, has a tendency to
          [slow] the educational and mental development of [minority]
          children and to deprive them of some of the benefits they would
          receive in a racially integrated school system . . .”
         “This disposition makes unnecessary any discussion whether such
          segregation also violates the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth
          Amendment.”

Probiotics are full of millions of bacteria to help create a better digestive
system. A popular type of probiotic is one that must be refrigerated. One
researcher claimed that the requirement of cold temperatures makes this
type of probiotic ill-suited for ingestion in the stomach.

 10
Which of the following, if true, would most directly support the
researcher’s hypothesis?

         Probiotics that are commonly found in warmer climates are found
          to have a statistically significant effect on digestive health when
          used as advised by a doctor.
         The effectiveness of probiotics is negatively affected when
          consumed in conjunction with a lukewarm beverage.
         Probiotics that naturally thrive in a colder environment are more
          likely to be hypersensitive to the high temperatures and acidity of
          the human stomach.
         People who are taking antibiotics for respiratory illnesses typically
          find that the effectiveness of probiotics is greatly diminished.
A researcher is investigating perceptions about the leading causes of
traumatic brain injuries. The researcher finds that most Americans believe
that violent physical assaults and car crashes are the most significant source
of traumatic brain injuries. The researcher would like to educate the
American public on the fact that while car crashes and physical assaults are
a significant source of traumatic brain injuries, the larger danger is from
less dramatic injuries that could take place closer to home:
________________

 11
Which choice most effectively uses data from the graph to complete the
example?

         Falls and unintentional blunt trauma cause approximately 55% of
          traumatic brain injuries.
        Further research is needed on the 21% of “other” causes of
         traumatic brain injuries.
        The majority of traumatic brain injuries are caused by a source
         other than falls.
        Motor vehicles are, in fact, more likely to cause traumatic brain
        injuries than physical assaults.

Because of the antimicrobial properties of soap, a thorough washing will
take away almost all bacteria from a surface. Whether a person is washing
their hands or wiping down their countertop, soap creates a sterile
environment. This is crucial at times when pernicious bacteria are present
(like when handling raw food or after using the restroom). However, living
in a constantly sterile environment is, for the average person, ________

 12
Which choice most logically completes the text?

        not necessary.
        quite advisable.
        a highly personal decision.
        a viable option.

Get-rich-quick schemes have probably existed since humans first used
money to buy instead of goods to barter. Most have learned to be wary of
people and organizations that claim to be an easy path to riches. However,
in the 1950s a new type of scheme emerged disguised as a work or career
opportunity but was designed to pad the pockets of a select few. This
effective setup targeted young women who found life at home to be boring
after returning to domesticity after World War II. It allowed a woman to feel
like she was contributing financially to her family’s well-being while still
maintaining her role in the household. This sales system, called multi-level
marketing (MLM), still pervades our society today, ___________

 13
Which choice most logically completes the text?

         giving ambitious young professionals the opportunity to advance
          their careers.
         inspiring women to break through the glass ceiling to achieve
          financial windfalls.
         with an increased level of interest leading up to military conflicts.
         promising unsuspecting targets the chance at great wealth—for a
          cost.

Throughout Europe, the Age of Enlightenment ushered in a renewed and
unprecedented interest in scientific investigation. A devotee to the zeitgeist,
17th-century scientist Robert Boyle redefined the word “element” to
describe a substance that cannot be degraded into simpler forms by
chemical reaction. His definition not only liberated the word from its
erroneous Aristotelian origins, but it survived for a full 300 years—during
which it was used in the invention of the periodic table—until
_________________________

 14
Which choice most logically completes the text?

         the theory of biological evolution became quite popular.
         the discovery of subatomic particles in the 20th century.
         democratic governance attained global prominence.
         space exploration changed from a fantasy to reality.

Since the beginning of roller derby, it _____ included players who are often
marginalized in society because of their race, which is something that
continues to be the case even today.

 15
Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the conventions of
Standard English?

        has
        have
        had
        will have

March was abnormally __________ the latter part of the month. April,
however, was unusually warm for the springtime.

 16
Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the conventions of
Standard English?

        cool; especially so during
        cool especially so during
        cool, especially so during
        cool. Especially so during

Prospective employees see the listings, apply, and wait eagerly by the phone
only to never hear anything. No response at all for one job after another—
__________________

 17
Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the conventions of
Standard English?

        demoralizing quite it can be.
        quite demoralizing, it can be.
        demoralizing it can be quite.
        it can be quite demoralizing.
Some graffiti decreases the value of an area by making it appear abandoned
and unkempt. Other graffiti spruces up a blank wall, adds much needed
color, and creates art in an otherwise dismal space. _____________

 18
Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the conventions of
Standard English?

        How are cities supposed to decide what to leave; and what to paint
         over?
        How are cities supposed to decide, what to leave and what to paint
         over?
        How are cities supposed to decide: what to leave and what to paint
         over?
        How are cities supposed to decide what to leave and what to paint
         over?

For many students approaching the end of their collegiate studies, the
prospect of finding a job is daunting. While some will already have leads
based on professor recommendations or internship work, others will look at
thousands of posts on online job boards and _____________

 19
Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the conventions of
Standard English?

        felt overwhelmed.
        felt overwhelming.
        feel overwhelming.
        feel overwhelmed.

Each discipline has its own focus, but the thought process and science
underlying all engineering problems are more similar than different. This
empowers ______________

 20
Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the conventions of
Standard English?

         an engineer; to think in an interdisciplinary way.
         an engineer—to think in an interdisciplinary way.
         an engineer to think in an interdisciplinary way.
         an, engineer, to think in an interdisciplinary way.

Whereas a traditional English teacher might assign canonical texts and then
assess a ________ understanding of plot, setting, and character analyses, a
critical English teacher assigns literature with a goal in mind of what the
class will get from that particular text, and then encourages the class to talk
about how the social issues reflect their own lives, whose voices weren’t
heard, and how the story might be told differently from another perspective.

 21
Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the conventions of
Standard English?

         classes
         class’es
         class’s
         classes’

Both Truman and MacArthur were American leaders in the late 1940s and
early 1950s in the aftermath of the Allied victory during World War II.
Naturally, only one of them could emerge victorious from the rubble of
_______ power struggle.

 22
Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the conventions of
Standard English?

        there
        their
        his
        one’s

After a year and a half, Wilson’s term as president ended and Edith became
again just his wife. However, her role in running the country during
Wilson’s illness should be remembered by history. Whoever ends up being
the first woman to take the oath of the office of president will
______________

 23
Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the conventions of
Standard English?

        not be alone she will be standing in Ediths shadow.
        not be alone, she will be standing, in Edith’s shadow.
        not be alone; she will be standing in Edith’s shadow.
        not be alone, she will be standing in Ediths shadow.

Catering can be a good fit for those who would like to work as a chef on a
more part-time basis, _______ they could schedule their catering jobs
around their family obligations.

 24
Which choice completes the text with the most logical transition?

        but
        which
        while
         as

The biggest fundamental issue that impacts the fair treatment of guest
workers is ensuring that guest workers have a voice. Laws may be in place;
_______ they do nothing if the guest workers cannot speak up when
something is wrong for fear of retribution.

 25
Which choice completes the text with the most logical transition?

         consequently,
         and
         however,
         because

While conducting research, a student took these notes:

      The Battle of Gettysburg was a turning point in the American Civil
      War.
      General Meade commanded the Union forces at the Battle of
      Gettysburg while General Robert E. Lee commanded the Confederate
      troops.
      The battle lasted three days.
      Abraham Lincoln visited the site soon thereafter and gave the
      Gettysburg Address.
      The Battle of Gettysburg was the northernmost battle of the American
      Civil War.

 26
The student wants to highlight the leaders of the opposing forces at the
Battle of Gettysburg. Which choice most effectively uses relevant
information from the notes to accomplish this goal?
         Abraham Lincoln’s leadership during the Battle of Gettysburg led
          to the defeat of Robert E. Lee’s troops.
         Over a three-day period, the armies of the Union and the
          Confederacy met in furious combat on the battlefield of
          Gettysburg.
         While most of the Civil War was fought in the South, Lee ensured
          that the Battle of Gettysburg was fought in the North.
         The Union commander Meade and the Confederate commander
          Lee led their armies into combat at Gettysburg.

While researching a topic, a student has taken the following notes:

      Psoriasis is a common skin condition, affecting one out of 100
      Americans.
      Psoriasis is an autoimmune condition, caused by an overactive
      immune system.
      Psoriasis often presents as itchy, silvery plaques, or patches, on the
      skin, which can become irritated and bleed.
      People with psoriasis can have just the skin changes, just arthritis, or
      both, called psoriatic arthritis.
      Psoriasis is not contagious, but if the effects or appearance are
      bothersome, there are many treatment options.

 27
The student wants to share information about psoriasis to a friend who is
extremely concerned about having it to help the friend become less worried.
Which choice most effectively uses relevant information from the notes to
accomplish this goal?

         Psoriasis is caused by an immune system that is not functioning
          normally.
         Psoriasis can lead to arthritic symptoms.
         Psoriasis can cause skin irritation and bleeding.
There are many treatment options for psoriasis.
Section 1, Module 2B: Reading and Writing
32 MINUTES, 27 QUESTIONS


DIRECTIONS
             You will be tested on a variety of important reading and writing skills. Each question
             has one or more passages, possibly including a graph or table. Carefully read each
             passage and question and choose the best answer to the question based on the
             passage(s).
             Every question in this section is multiple-choice, with four possible answers. Each
             question has only one best answer.




Even though it is illegal to do so, some farms and companies do not
reimburse guest workers for visa fees and other travel expenses related to
obtaining the jobs. Some of the recruiters have even threatened the lives of
the families of the guest workers if they did not ________ with the fees.

 1
Which choice completes the text with the most logical and precise word or
phrase?

        observe
        comply
        disobey
        ignore
A 1999 article, “The Importance of Music in Early Childhood,” advocated
for music education in learning of language, mathematics, and social
studies. Music—readily available and easily engaged—is a powerful
memory ______ that can be approached via “play,” beginning in delight but
ending in knowledge.

 2
Which choice completes the text with the most logical and precise word or
phrase?

        trigger
        souvenir
        dialect
        indoctrination

When he was in high school at a predominantly white institution, Countee
Cullen excelled, despite being one of the few African American students
who attended. Additionally, he developed his talents and served as the
editor of the high school newspaper and literary magazine and even won a
local award for his poetry. Later, he was accepted into New York
University, where he received several awards; most notably, he won second
place for the Witter Bynner Undergraduate Poetry Contest for his 1923
poem “The Ballad of the Brown Girl.” Following his graduation from New
York University, Cullen became _________ poet with works like “Copper
Sun” and “The Black Christ” and other poems.

 3
Which choice completes the text with the most logical and precise word or
phrase?

        a notorious
        an imminent
        an illustrated
        a renowned

Environmentally and cost-conscious planters use more modern solutions
only when absolutely necessary. Modern technology allows farmers to test
soil in various parts of a field and apply topical treatments as minimally as
possible only in areas where it is needed. This process allows crop rotation
and soil treatment to work together. However, the drones, testing machines,
and high-end equipment for GPS fertilizer applications are very expensive
for the average family farm. Consequently, crop rotation remains the
________ choice for everyday soil management.

 4
Which choice completes the text with the most logical and precise word or
phrase?

        periodic
        staple
        subsistent
        coarse

The first introduction many students have to the world of investment and
the stock market is through their American history class when they learn
about the devastating stock market crash that led into the Great Depression,
or the market crash that much led us into the more recent Great Recession.
However, what is rarely _______ students is the success that the majority of
people experience in the stock market when they invest intelligently over a
long period of time. Indeed, most of those high school students will
(hopefully) go on to have a retirement account that invests in the stock
market, allowing them to comfortably cease work between the ages of 65
and 70.

 5
Which choice completes the text with the most logical and precise word or
phrase?
          awarded to
          produced for
          panned out for
          impressed upon

The following text is from the Brothers Grimm 1812 fairy tale “The Mouse,
the Bird, and the Sausage.”

     They therefore drew lots, and it fell to the sausage to bring in the wood,
     to the mouse to cook, and to the bird to fetch the water.
     And now what happened? The sausage started in search of wood, the
     bird made the fire, and the mouse put on the pot, and then these two
     waited till the sausage returned with the fuel for the following day. But
     the sausage remained so long away, that they became uneasy, and the
     bird flew out to meet him. He had not flown far, however, when he
     came across a dog who, having met the sausage, had regarded him as
     his legitimate booty, and so seized and swallowed him. The bird
     complained to the dog of this bare-faced robbery, but nothing he said
     was of any avail, for the dog answered that he found false credentials on
     the sausage, and that was the reason his life had been forfeited.

 6
Which choice best describes the function of the underlined selection in the
text as a whole?

          To give a dishonest explanation
          To provide a true excuse for the action      To demonstrate the
           dog’s curiosity for the truth    To display an attempt to find
           common ground Though fermentation does not require oxygen
           consumption, it is not solely limited to anaerobic organisms. Even
           humans sometimes undergo fermentation when oxygen supplies
           are low. This often occurs when the organism rapidly needs more
           energy than can be produced from cellular respiration alone.
           Some human cells undergo fermentation more often than others,
           depending on the cell’s specific needs. One such example is
           during strenuous exercise, when oxygen demand for cellular
           respiration is unable to be met. This results in muscle cells
           undergoing lactic acid fermentation, which provides additional
           energy to prevent muscle fatigue.

 7
Which choice best states the main purpose of the text?

          To illustrate that fermentation is the primary process whereby
           humans obtain energy        To show that humans can use
           fermentation when extra energy is needed         To explain how
           vigorous exercise is a way to minimize the amount of
           fermentation that takes place       To describe how human muscles
           use fermentation instead of respiration to acquire energy The
           following text is adapted from William T. Hamilton, Jr.’s 2020
           novel The Three Stages of Clarinda Thorbald. In it, young
           Clarinda is waiting for the day of her wedding to arrive while
           conversing with her father.

     “Listen, Clarinda, you mustn’t weep. Rather you must be filled with joy,
     for this is a festival. You have come into something new. A great
     responsibility grasps you in its hand. You are re-born. Nature calls you
     and you go—it is inexorable—you cannot help. You must not weep;
     rather you must sing and dance. You must array yourself in gold and in
     silk and go forth to meet the bridegroom.”
     “Is there no way?” she asked with pleading in her voice. With terrible
     finality, he answered “No!”

 8
Based on the text, Clarinda’s father’s ultimate attitude toward Clarinda’s
concerns can best be described as
          indulgent and patient.
          exasperated and dismissive.
          confused and questioning.
          friendly and understanding.

The following text is from the 1641 work Meditations on First Philosophy
by René Descartes in which he muses about the nature of knowledge.

     But, to this end, it will not be necessary for me to show that the whole
     of these are false—a point, perhaps, which I shall never reach; but as
     even now my reason convinces me that I ought not the less carefully to
     withhold belief from what is not entirely certain and indubitable, than
     from what is manifestly false, it will be sufficient to justify the rejection
     of the whole if I shall find in each some ground for doubt. Nor for this
     purpose will it be necessary even to deal with each belief individually,
     which would be truly an endless labor; but, as the removal from below
     of the foundation necessarily involves the downfall of the whole edifice,
     I will at once approach the criticism of the principles on which all my
     former beliefs rested.

 9
According to the text, Descartes’ minimal threshold for dismissing a
knowledge claim is if it is

          completely in error.
          moderately wrong.
          even slightly flawed.
          any claim to knowledge.
An economist analyzes the likelihood that someone might make money
from participating in a “pyramid scheme,” defined as a fraudulent way to
make money by recruiting investors into some sort of money-making
scheme. Instead of making money from providing a valuable good or
service, the people who are the early investors in the pyramid scheme might
make money, while the later investors often lose all their investment. The
economist claims that over half of those who participate in a typical
pyramid scheme are likely to profit, while less than half of participants will
lose money.

 10
Which choice best describes data from the table that weaken the
economist’s claim?
        Over 1,000 participants in a typical pyramid scheme end up
         profiting.
        The initiator of a pyramid scheme can earn more than six figures in
         revenue.
        The latecomers to participate in a classic pyramid scheme might
         only see about $14,000 in revenue.
        In a classic pyramid scheme, only 12.49% of participants profit.

A student is analyzing Robert Louis Stevenson’s 1885 poem “My Shadow.”
The poem shows the playful mindset that a child experiences when learning
about how their shadow works. In one instance, the narrator learns about
how shadows do not function in the absence of light: _________________

 11
Which quotation from the poem most effectively completes the example?

        “I have a little shadow that goes in and out with me, / And what
         can be the use of him is more than I can see. / He is very, very like
         me from the heels up to the head; / And I see him jump before me,
         when I jump into my bed.”
        “The funniest thing about him is the way he likes to grow— / Not
         at all like proper children, which is always very slow; / For he
         sometimes shoots up taller like an India-rubber ball, / And he
         sometimes gets so little that there’s none of him at all.”
        “He hasn’t got a notion of how children ought to play, / And can
         only make a fool of me in every sort of way. / He stays so close
         beside me, he’s a coward you can see; / I’d think shame to stick to
         nursie as that shadow sticks to me!”
        “One morning, very early, before the sun was up, / I rose and found
         the shining dew on every buttercup; / But my lazy little shadow,
         like an arrant sleepy-head, / Had stayed at home behind me and
         was fast asleep in bed.”
The buildings at Chaco Canyon pose a mystery for archeologists who seek
to learn their purpose. A vast compound of buildings created by an ancient
people, Chaco Canyon does not seem to be a permanent habitation, as there
are no significant garbage piles. In addition, it is located in a remote and
very harsh environment. It is questionable whether any peoples would have
chosen such a place for a settlement. Modern archeologists believe that it
could possibly be a spiritual site that is designed to align with astronomical
cycles. They have turned to astronomy for answers and have shown how the
roads and buildings at Chaco Canyon align not just with the regular cycles
of the sun, but, they hypothesize, with the complicated multi-year dance of
the moon. Since the moon’s rhythm has such a long cycle, however, it will
take many more years to confirm this hypothesis.

 12
Which of the following, if true, would provide the most direct support for
the archeologists’ hypothesis?

        Historical artifacts found in Chaco Canyon that have bright
         coloration resembling both the daytime sun and full moon at
         night.
        Evidence uncovered of an early road system connecting Chaco
         Canyon to far-flung territories, confirming the Canyon’s
         important role as a trade hub.
        Archeological evidence finding that there were in fact large
         garbage piles in the Chaco Canyon region and that earlier studies
         had not sufficiently considered the role of natural decay.
        A multi-decade study showing that the south and north walls of
         Chaco Canyon precisely align with the minimum and maximum
         moons over a regular 18.6-year interval.
In a 2014 study on the Warburg Effect, researchers tested the change in
glucose concentration over a period of one hour in various cancer cell lines.
The average rate of change of glucose concentration in each cell-type is
shown in the figure above. (An asterisk (*) denotes the cell tested is
cancerous.) The researchers will use the results from a study on the
Warburg Effect to determine what most distinguishes cancerous cells from
noncancerous ones. When compared to the noncancerous cells, the
cancerous cells _________________

 13
Which choice most effectively uses data from the figure to complete the
text?

        have a generally greater average rate of change.
        typically have a lower average rate of change.
        have approximately the same rate of change.
        are more likely to have a rate of change of zero.

“The New York Tenement-House Evil and Its Cure” was written by Ernest
Flagg for Scribner’s Magazine in 1894. In the piece, Flagg discusses the
deplorable living conditions in the tenement housing developments, how
the tenements came to be, and how the issue might be solved. A historian
analyzing Flagg’s writing claims that Flagg believed that the primary
motivation of those who built the tenement housing developments was to
make money.

 14
Which quotation from “The New York Tenement-House Evil and Its Cure”
most effectively illustrates the claim?

        “If this desire to cover too much of the land proved objectionable
         in houses occupied by one family, its results have been simply
         disastrous in houses occupied by several families.”
        “Acres upon acres have been covered by them, all constructed on
         the same general plan based upon the shape of the 25 by 100 foot
         lot.”
        “The tenement-house evil is staring us in the face, and the
         community is daily becoming more and more alive to the
         imperative necessity for reform.”
        “It should be made unprofitable to erect the kind of tenements we
         now have.”

Owing to a redundancy in the human genome, there are four copies of the α
globin gene, with two α-coding regions on each copy of chromosome 16.
For this reason, the spectrum of severity in α thalassemia is particularly
broad. For instance, deletion of a single gene will result in a carrier state
and is unlikely to cause clinically acute symptoms. Deletion of all four,
meanwhile, leads to a precipitation during the fetal period of nonfunctional
γ tetramers, also called Hb Barts, and is universally lethal in utero. Thus,
the intensity of thalassemia would be more uniform if there were _______

 15
Which choice most logically completes the text?

        fewer copies of the α globin gene in humans.
        the same number of copies of the α globin gene in humans.
        more copies of the α globin gene in humans.
        less research conducted on the human genome.

Undergraduate degrees in petroleum and nuclear engineering exist.
However, both fields could be considered subdisciplines of chemical
engineering, and jobs or graduate degree programs can be entered in both
fields with a bachelor’s in chemical engineering. ___________ can be
entered with a bachelor’s in mechanical engineering. Thus, it may be
advisable to earn a bachelor’s in mechanical engineering, then specialize in
aerospace later.

 16
Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the conventions of
Standard English?

        Similarly aerospace jobs, and graduate degree programs
           Similarly aerospace jobs—and graduate degree programs
           Similarly, aerospace jobs and graduate degree programs;
           Similarly, aerospace jobs and graduate degree programs After
         graduating from the program in New Mexico, _______________
         before enrolling in the United States Army to fight in Vietnam.

 17
Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the conventions of
Standard English?

        at the San Francisco Arts Institute Cannon briefly studied     at
         the San Francisco Arts Institute did Cannon study briefly
           Cannon briefly studied at the San Francisco Arts Institute
           Cannon at the San Francisco Arts Institute studied briefly
         Birders pay careful attention to the preferred foods of their
         favorite birds and make sure to provide the right kinds of snacks
         for each. This can be done by researching individual birds,
         reading the packaging on different mixes of birdseed, or
         consulting an online chart of birds and their _________ foods.

 18
Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the conventions of
Standard English?

        preferring
        preferred
        prefer
        prefers

Pinckney Benton Stewart (P.B.S.) Pinchback was a successful politician. In
1868, he was elected as a Louisiana state senator. Pinchback was elected
president pro tempore, and after the 1871 death of Lieutenant Governor
__________ became the lieutenant governor. Then, after an election riddled
with accusations of fraud, the governor of Louisiana was impeached.
Pinchback became the governor of Louisiana and served the remaining
weeks of the term.

 19
Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the conventions of
Standard English?

        Oscar Dunn, (the first elected African American lieutenant
         governor), he      Oscar Dunn (the first, elected, African
         American lieutenant governor), he       Oscar Dunn (the first,
         elected African American lieutenant, governor), he       Oscar
         Dunn (the first elected African American lieutenant governor), he
         Historians believe that after rye became widely cultivated, the
         parasitic ergot fungus began to ________ unsuspecting
         communities. This unfortunate development likely caused strange
         visions among those affected.
 20
Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the conventions of
Standard English?

        wreck the havoc of
        wreck havoc with
        wreak havoc on
        wreak havoc toward

In the dry, desert landscape of South America, the CAM (crassulacean acid
metabolism) adaptation in pineapples is advantageous. This is _________
pineapple can conserve water despite living in arid conditions.

 21
Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the conventions of
Standard English?

        because through the CAM adaptation: the           because, through the
         CAM adaptation—the          because; through the CAM adaptation
         the      because—through the CAM adaptation—the Just like in
         most art forms, traditional Native American art _________ many
         artists incorporate elements of traditional art into their modern
         creations.

 22
Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the conventions of
Standard English?

        has, despite many people’s efforts to shelter it from outside
         influences, evolved, and now         has, despite many peoples
         efforts to shelter it from outside influences evolved and now
           has despite many—people’s efforts to shelter it from outside
         influences—evolved and now            has despite many peoples
         efforts to shelter it from outside influences: evolved and now
         While fertilizers and herbicides are very effective at providing
         nutrients to crops and reducing weeds, they are quite expensive
         not just to purchase, but also to apply. Farmers who wish to apply
         herbicides and fertilizers must make extra passes through their
         fields; this costs the farmer’s time as well as wear and tear on
         equipment that can cost upwards of a million dollars. _______
         both fertilizer and herbicides can have negative environmental
         consequences in the form of runoff. Whereas a good crop rotation
         will keep weeds down organically and deposit nutrients into the
         soil, applications of fertilizer and herbicides are merely topical.

 23
Which choice completes the text with the most logical transition?

        In contrast,
        In addition,
        Due to this,
        Accordingly,

When it comes to the biological and biochemical building blocks of
organisms, there’s no mistaking that humans are special. From our amazing
defense mechanisms to our innate ability to adapt to different environments,
the human body is quite phenomenal. However, perfection simply does not
exist in nature, and thus the human body comes with a variety of flaws.
_______ most humans can only dream of being able to filter harmful
cholesterol from their blood without having to resort to strenuous exercise
or, in more extreme cases, prescription medications. Understanding the
mechanisms behind removing cholesterol from our bloodstream remains a
relatively unknown mystery.

 24
Which choice completes the text with the most logical transition?

        For example,
         In contrast,
         Peripherally,
         Nevertheless,

While conducting research, a student took these notes:

      Male trees produce pollen and female trees produce a variety of seeds,
      including pods, nuts, and helicopters.
      To prevent the need to clean up seeds, many cities and homeowners
      only plant male trees.
      Some homeowners and cities don’t plant trees at all so they can avoid
      dealing with leaves.
      An excess of pollen can greatly exacerbate allergies and other lung
      complications. People with allergies should avoid pollen heavy
      environments.
      Female trees absorb pollen out of the air and can help reduce allergy
      symptoms. Female trees can also produce food such as nuts and fruit.

 25
The student wants to suggest a type of person who would greatly benefit
from planting mainly female trees in their neighborhood. Which choice
most effectively uses relevant information from the notes to accomplish this
goal?

         Someone who suffers from a nut allergy would benefit from being
          surrounded by female trees.
         A person who suffers from pollen allergies would benefit from
          female tree plantings.
         Female tree plantings would be especially good for someone who
          does not enjoy raking leaves.
         If somebody prefers vegetables to fruit, female tree plantings
          would be particularly helpful.
While researching a topic, a student has taken the following notes:
    Public domain works are no longer subject to copyright restrictions.
    If something is in the public domain, it can be used without having to
    seek permission.
    Works that are produced by the U.S. federal government are typically
    in the public domain.
    If it is 70 years after the death of a work’s author, the work typically
    becomes part of the public domain.
    Works that are privately owned usually require permission from the
    original creator to use—this permission can sometimes be obtained by
    paying royalties to the creator.

 26
The student wants to suggest a work that would most likely not be part of
the public domain. Which choice most effectively uses relevant information
from the notes to accomplish this goal?

         A federal government collection of U.S. presidential speeches is
          not in the public domain.
         A newly created book by a private-sector author who is still alive
          is not in the public domain.
         A novel that was written over 200 years ago is most likely in the
          public domain.
         When a filmmaker pays royalties to the author of a movie
         screenplay, the final film would be in the public domain.

While researching a topic, a student has taken the following notes:
      Harry Frankfurt is an American philosopher who wrote “Freedom of
      the Will and the Concept of a Person.”
      Frankfurt articulates a theory of what it means for someone to have
      “free will.”
      He breaks human desire into two categories: first-order desires and
      second-order desires.
      A first-order desire is a want to perform an action; for example,
      someone could want to eat a meal.
      A second-order desire is a want to have a certain desire; for example,
      someone could “want” to “want to eat more healthfully.”
      Frankfurt argues that someone is acting according to their free will
      when their actions align with their second-order desires.

 27
The student wants to present a plausible reason as to why Frankfurt would
not consider an animal to possess free will. Which choice most effectively
uses relevant information from the notes to accomplish this goal?

         Some animals can consider not just what they “want,” but what
          they “want to want.”
         An animal can only possess second-order desires since it lacks the
          ability to have first-order desires.
         Since an animal most likely only has first-order desires, it cannot
          be considered as having the capacity for free will.
         Only humans can be considered capable of letting their first-order
          desires govern their actions.
Section 2, Module 1: Math
35 MINUTES, 22 QUESTIONS


DIRECTIONS

 All expressions and variables use real numbers.
 All figures are drawn to scale.
 Every figure lies in a plane.
 The domain of given functions is the set of all real numbers for which the corresponding value of
 the function is real.
   For multiple-choice questions, solve the problem and pick the correct answer from the provided
   choices. Each multiple-choice question has only one correct answer.
For student-produced response questions, solve each problem and record your answer following
these guidelines:

 If you find more than one correct answer, enter just one answer.
 You can enter up to five characters for a positive answer and up to six characters (this includes the
 negative sign) for a negative answer.
 If your answer is a fraction that does not fit in the given space, enter the decimal equivalent
 instead.
 If your answer is a decimal that does not fit in the given space, enter it by stopping at or rounding
 up at the fourth digit.
 If your answer is a mixed number (like 4      ), enter it as an improper fraction (9/2) or its decimal
 equivalent (4.5).
 Do not enter symbols like a comma, dollar sign, or percent sign.




                                         Examples

                                                                      Unacceptable Entries
            Answer                   Acceptable Entries                That Will Receive
                                                                          Zero Credit
                4.5                               4.5
                                                 4.50
                                                 9/2                     41/2
                                                 8/9                     0.88
                                                .8888                     .88
                                                .8889                     .89
                                                0.888                    0.89
                                                0.889
                                                 −1/9                    −.11
                                                −.1111                   −0.11
                                                −0.111


REFERENCE




The number of degrees of arc in a circle is 360.
The number of radians of arc in a circle is 2π.
The sum of the measures in degrees of the angles of a triangle is 180.




 1
Which of the following expressions is equivalent to             ?




 2
What number is 5% greater than 200?




 3




Which of the following is closest to the price in U.S. dollars of an ounce of
gold in the year 1970?

        $245
        $520
        $610
         $1,225

 4




If (a, b) is the solution to the system of equations above, what is the value
of a?

         1
         2
         3
         4

 5
A museum gift shop provides a 10% discount for museum members. If a
customer who is a museum member purchases a book from the store for
$18, what was the original price of the book prior to the discount (ignore
sales tax)?

         $12
         $20
         $22
         $26

 6
The Statue of Liberty has a height of 93 meters. A model toy version (done
to scale) of the Statue of Liberty is 1/500th the height of the actual statue.
Given that there are 100 centimeters in a meter, what is the height of the
model in centimeters, calculated to the nearest whole centimeter?

         19 cm      86 cm      186 cm       320 cm 7
Which of the following models the function as presented in the graph
above?

        f(x) = x2
        f(x) = x2 + 1
        f(x) = 2x
        f(x) = 3x + 1

 8
Parallelogram ADEC has a side of DE of length 10 units, and a side of DA
of length 5 units. The length from A to B is 3 units. What is the area of the
parallelogram in square units?




 9




The acceleration of an object moving in a circle is determined by the
equation above, in which v is the velocity of the object, A is its acceleration,
and R is the radius of the circle. What is the value of the radius in terms of
the other variables?




 10
If y = bx2 + 5 when x = 2 and y = 17, what is the value of the constant b?

         −5
         3
         4
         12

 11
An airplane travels 3,000 miles in 10 hours. What is its speed in miles per
hour?




 12




If (x, y) is a solution to the above system of equations, what is the value of
y?




 13
Francisco is packing two bags for his trip. The capacity of the small bag is
one third that of the larger bag. If the total capacity of the two bags together
is 80 liters, what is the capacity of the smaller bag?

         5 liters       8 liters   12 liters   20 liters 14


                    x                                     f(x)
                    1                                      1C
                    2
                                                           2C
                   3                                       3C



In the function with values given above, in which C is a constant, if f (2) =
8, what is the value of f (3)?

         16
         27
         64
         81

 15
The height of a certain triangle is twice the width of its base. If the area of
the triangle is 25 square units, what is the height of the triangle?




 16
In the year 1990, approximately 2 million U.S. residents were Internet
users. In the year 2000, approximately 115 million U.S. residents were
Internet users. Assuming the growth of Internet users was at a steady
geometric rate, which function could be used to model the number of
Internet users, I, in millions of people, T years after 1990?

         I(T) = 2 × (1.5)T
         I(T) = 2 × (0.5)T
         I(T) = 2 × (1.5)−T
         I(T) = 2 × (2.5)−T

 17
              Material                     Kilograms per Cubic Meter
                Cement                                  1,440
               Maplewood                                 755
                 Steel                                  7,850
               Cedarwood                                 380
                 Glass                                  2,580
                 Gravel                                 2,000



Based on the information in the table, what is the mass of a solid steel wall
that has a volume of 300 cubic meters?

         26 kilograms    8,150 kilograms        432,000 kilograms
           2,355,000 kilograms 18
The mean height of seven teenage boys is 67 inches. If one of the boys has
a height of 74 inches, what is the mean height of the remaining boys to the
nearest tenth of an inch?




 19
∠X is measured in degrees. If the cosine of ∠X is      , what is the sine of
(90 − ∠X)?




 20
Which of the following is NOT a factor of the above expression?

         x−4
         x−7
         x+5
         x 21
There are 10 cards, each distinctly numbered from 1 to 10. After a card is
selected from the randomly shuffled set, it is returned to the set. If someone
first picks a 3 and then picks a 2, what is the probability that on the third
selection the person will pick a 9?




 22
In the equation 3x − 6 = 3(x − a), the constant a is greater than 2. Which of
the following statements must be true?

         The equation has exactly one solution.
         The equation has exactly two solutions.
         The equation has infinitely many solutions.
         The equation has no solution.
                                ANSWER KEY
                 Practice Test 3: Adaptive

Section 2, Module 1: Math
  1.   C
  2.   210
  3.   A 4. D
  5.   B
  6.   A 7. C
  8.   40
  9.   B
10. B
11. 300
12. 1
13. D
14. B
15. 10
16. A 17. D
18. 65.8
19. B
20. B
21. B
22. D


Total Correct Answers: _____ / 22
Did you get 13 or fewer questions correct? If so, move to Math
Module 2A on page 795.

Did you get 14 or more questions correct? If so, move to Math
Module 2B on page 808.
Section 2, Module 2A: Math
35 MINUTES, 22 QUESTIONS


DIRECTIONS

 All expressions and variables use real numbers.
 All figures are drawn to scale.
 Every figure lies in a plane.
 The domain of given functions is the set of all real numbers for which the corresponding value of
 the function is real.
   For multiple-choice questions, solve the problem and pick the correct answer from the provided
   choices. Each multiple-choice question has only one correct answer.
   For student-produced response questions, solve each problem and record your answer
   following these guidelines:

 If you find more than one correct answer, enter just one answer.
 You can enter up to five characters for a positive answer and up to six characters (this includes the
 negative sign) for a negative answer.
 If your answer is a fraction that does not fit in the given space, enter the decimal equivalent
 instead.
 If your answer is a decimal that does not fit in the given space, enter it by stopping at or rounding
 up at the fourth digit.
 If your answer is a mixed number (like       ), enter it as an improper fraction (9/2) or its decimal
 equivalent (4.5).
 Do not enter symbols like a comma, dollar sign, or percent sign.




                                         Examples

                                                                      Unacceptable Entries
            Answer                   Acceptable Entries                That Will Receive
                                                                          Zero Credit
                4.5                               4.5
                                                 4.50
                                                 9/2                     41/2
                                                 8/9                     0.88
                                                .8888                     .88
                                                .8889                     .89
                                                0.888                    0.89
                                                0.889
                                                 −1/9                    −.11
                                                −.1111                   −0.11
                                                −0.111




REFERENCE




The number of degrees of arc in a circle is 360.
The number of radians of arc in a circle is 2π.
The sum of the measures in degrees of the angles of a triangle is 180.


 1
In the line formed by the equation y + 5 = 7x, what is the value of the y-
intercept?

         −5
         −1
         5
         7

 2




Twenty students were asked the combined total number of servings of fruits
and vegetables they have each day. The results are presented in the
histogram above. What is the median number of servings of fruits and
vegetables consumed each day?

         4
         5
        6
        7

 3
Which of the following is equivalent to   ?

        x+9
        x−9
        x2 − 3
        x2 + 3

 4
What is the best approximation of the slope of the line graphed above?




         2

 5
Walter is going backpacking on a trail. The total distance of the trail is 300
miles. If he has already traveled 100 miles on the trail, how many miles per
day, m, will he need to travel in order to complete his journey in D days?


         m = 300D


         m = 200 + D

 6
Which of the following expressions is equivalent to 2(x − 4) + 4?

         2x − 4
         2x + 4
         4x − 4
         4x + 4

 7
The number of dollars, C, it costs for Halle to run a restaurant is modeled
by the function C(m) = 10m + 10,000 in which m is the number of meals
served. What is the meaning of the 10 in this function?

         The total cost for all the meals sold.
        The fixed costs for the restaurant to operate.
        The profit the restaurant has for each meal sold.
        The additional cost to the restaurant for each additional meal.

 8
Which of the following represents the graph of    y + 2 = −x?
 9
In a survey of 1,000 likely voters,   like Candidate A,     like Candidate B,
and the remainder like neither candidate. If a likely voter is selected at
random, what is the probability that they will like neither candidate?




 10
A silverware drawer has a total of 80 forks and spoons. If there are 5 forks
for every 3 spoons, how many forks are there in the drawer?
 11
Traffic density is measured in vehicles/mile/lane. The traffic density in a
city is portrayed in the graph below




Between what two hours does the traffic density increase the most?

         Between 7 a.m. and 9 a.m.
         Between 9 a.m. and 11 a.m.
         Between 1 p.m. and 3 p.m.
         Between 3 p.m. and 5 p.m.
 12
In the system of inequalities y + 10 ≤ 3x and x ≤ −y − 2, what is the
maximum value of y?

         −6
         −4
         0
         3

 13
A meal costs x dollars. The sales tax on the meal is 7%. If the cashier
accidentally subtracted the sales tax from the price of the meal instead of
adding it, what would the price be in terms of x?

         0.07x
         0.7x
         0.93x
         1.07x

 14
Ken’s commute takes 25 more minutes in the evening than it does in the
morning. If his total daily commute takes 95 minutes, how long does his
morning commute take in minutes?




 15
The function f is determined by              . What is the value of f(2)?

         1
         5
        6
        9

 16
If the volume of a right rectangular prism is 90 cubic inches, and the
product of the length and width of the prism is 30 square inches, what is the
height of the prism?




 17

                               x2 − x − 20 = 0

What is the sum of the solutions to the equation above?




 18
The above circle graph gives the percentages of 800 city residents who
voted in favor of a tax levy (“YES”) and those who voted against it (“NO”).
If the central angle formed by the portion of the circle allocated to “NO” is
45°, how many of the residents voted “NO”?

         90
         100
         110
         120

 19
Density, mass, and volume are related by this formula:




If the mass of an object is 2 kilograms and its volume is 8 liters, what is the
object’s density in ?
 20
What percentage of 70 is 35?

         40%
         50%
         75%
         200%

 21
A line that is perpendicular to the line with the equation y = −3x + 5 has a y-
intercept of 4. What is the y value of a point in this perpendicular line when
its x value is 3?




 22
In triangle ABC above, AC is 24 units long and BC is 7 units long. What is
the cosine of ∠ABC?
Section 2, Module 2B: Math
35 MINUTES, 22 QUESTIONS


DIRECTIONS

All expressions and variables use real numbers.
All figures are drawn to scale.
Every figure lies in a plane.
The domain of given functions is the set of all real numbers for which the
corresponding value of the function is real.
For multiple-choice questions, solve the problem and pick the correct
answer from the provided choices. Each multiple-choice question has only
one correct answer.
For student-produced response questions, solve each problem and record
your answer following these guidelines:

If you find more than one correct answer, enter just one answer.
You can enter up to five characters for a positive answer and up to six
characters (this includes the negative sign) for a negative answer.
If your answer is a fraction that does not fit in the given space, enter the
decimal equivalent instead.
If your answer is a decimal that does not fit in the given space, enter it by
stopping at or rounding up at the fourth digit.
If your answer is a mixed number (like 4 ), enter it as an improper
fraction (9/2) or its decimal equivalent (4.5).
Do not enter symbols like a comma, dollar sign, or percent sign.



                               Examples
REFERENCE




The number of degrees of arc in a circle is 360.
The number of radians of arc in a circle is 2π.
The sum of the measures in degrees of the angles of a triangle is 180.


 1
In normal atmospheric conditions, the speed of sound through dry air can be
approximated with the following equation, in which V represents the
velocity in meters per second and T represents the air temperature in
degrees Celsius.

                                 V = 331.4 + 0.6T
What is the speed of sound in air that is 15 degrees Celsius?

         −537.3 meters per second
         14.8 meters per second
         340.4 meters per second
         423.5 meters per second

 2
For the line l, y = ax + n, where a and n are distinct nonzero constants.
Which of these lines must be perpendicular to line l?

         y = nx + a
         y = ax − n


         y = −ax + n

 3

If           , what is the value of a?


         1
         2
         3
         6

 4
Nyla is driving X miles per hour. Given that there are 5,280 feet in a mile,
what is her speed in feet per second?
 5




If the equation above has an infinite number of solutions, what is the value
of the constant k?

        k = −7
        k = −3
        k=0
        k=2

 6
In the equation 3 = |x − 1|, how many solutions are there?

        Exactly 1
        Exactly 2
        None
        Infinite

 7


       Heartbeats per Minute                   Breaths per Minute
                   60                                    12
                   70                                      15
                   80                                      18



Assuming Baahir’s heartbeats per minute and breaths per minute have a
linear relationship with one another, what would Baahir’s pulse (heartbeats
per minute) be if he is breathing at a rate of 24 breaths per minute?




 8
At exactly how many points will the function f(x) = x2 − 3x − 4 intersect the
x-axis?

         0
         1
         2
         3

 9
If f(x) = 3x − 1, for what value of x will f(x) intercept the y-axis when
graphed in the xy-coordinate plane?




 10
A city’s population at the beginning of 2010 was 50,000 residents. At the
beginning of 2011, its population was 45,000 residents, and at the beginning
of 2012, its population was 40,500 residents. If the city’s population has
continued to change at the same rate each year, which function models the
city’s population T years after 2010?
        P(T) = 50,000 × (0.9)T
        P(T) = 40,500 × (0.09)T
        P(T) = 50,000 × (1.1)T
        P(T) = 45,000 × (1.09)T

 11




In triangle ABC above, AB and BC are congruent, and ∠A is n degrees and
∠B is 2n degrees. What is the measure of ∠C in degrees?

        20°
        35°
        45°
        70°

 12
Consider these two histograms showing the frequency of 70 integers
between 1–9:
Which of the following quantities would be the largest amount greater for
set A than for set B?

        Median
        Standard Deviation
        Range
        Mean

 13
If a square has a diagonal of 7 units long, how many units would the
radius be of the largest possible circle that fits within the square (with the
circle tangent to the sides of the square)?




 14
Diana walks at a pace of 100 steps per minute. On Monday, she walks a
total of 6,000 steps. If she maintains her pace and wants to increase the total
number of steps on Tuesday to 10,000, how many additional hours will she
need to walk on Tuesday compared to Monday?

             of an hour

             of an hour

             of an hour
         1 hour

 15
The linear function g can be written in the form g(x) = mx + b, in which m
and b are constants. If g(1) = 7 and g(3) = 11, what is the value of m?

         −3
         −1
         2
         6

 16
Two hot air balloons were initially at the same height in the air at 200 feet.
After 10 minutes go by, one balloon’s height has increased by 30% and the
other balloon’s height has decreased by 15%. At that point, how many feet
apart in height would the two balloons be?

         60 feet
         70 feet
         80 feet
         90 feet

 17
If 2 x2 + bx + 4 = 0, for what values of b will there be no real solutions?

         b>
         |b| ≤ −
         b≥4
         |b| < 4

 18
The function f has an equation of f(x) = −(x + 3)(x − 5). For what value of x
is the value of f(x) at its maximum?




 19
A pizza parlor has a goal of making at least $10,000 a month in revenue
from selling pizzas. The parlor sells small pizzas for $10 each and large
pizzas for $20 each. If the total number of pizzas sold in a month must be
less than 800, which system of inequalities would represent the number of
small pizzas, S, and the number of large pizzas, L, that would meet the pizza
parlor’s requirements?

         S + L < 800
          10S + 20L ≥ 10,000

         S + L ≥ 800
          10S + 20L < 10,000

         10S + 20L < 800
          S + L < 10,000

         10S + 20L ≥ 800
          S + L > 10,000

 20
The reproduction number, called RO, is used to calculate the spread of
disease. If a virus has an RO of 6, an infected person will likely directly
infect six other people. Based on this, if 20 people are infected with a virus
that has an RO of 4.2, how many people will these 20 people most likely
directly infect?

         46
         54
         84
         98

 21

                                {2, 3, 6, 6, 7}

Which expression gives the complete set of potential values of a single
number x that can be added to the above set of data without changing the
median of the set?

         x≥7
         x<2
         x<6
         x≥6

 22
How many more units is the diameter of circle A than that of circle B?

Circle A: (x − 2)2 + (y − 7)2 = 49

Circle B: (x + 5)2 + (y − 3)2 = 25
                               ANSWER KEY
                 Practice Test 3: Adaptive

Score whichever module you completed: 2A or 2B.

Section 1, Module 2A: Reading and Writing
  1.   D
  2.   D
  3.   C
  4.   C
  5.   C
  6.   D
  7.   A
  8.   B
  9.   C
10. C
11. A
12. A
13. D
14. B
15. A
16. C
17. D
18. D
19. D
20. C
21. C
22. B
23. C
24. D
25. C
26. D
27. D

Total: ____ / 27

Section 1, Module 2B: Reading and Writing
  1.   B
  2.   A
  3.   D
  4.   B
  5.   D
  6.   A
  7.   B
  8.   B
  9.   C
10. D
11. D
12. D
13. A
14. D
15. A
16. D
17. C
18. B
19. D
20. C
21. D
22. A
23. B
24. A
25. B
26. B
27. C

Total: ____ / 27

Score whichever module you completed: 2A or 2B.

Section 2, Module 2A: Math
  1.   A
  2.   C
  3.   B
  4.   B
  5.   A
  6.   A
  7.   D
  8.   A
  9.   B
10. 50
11. A
12. B
13. C
14. 35
15. B
16. 3
17. 1
18. B
19. B
20. B
21. 5
22. A

Total: ____ / 22

Section 2, Module 2B: Math
  1.   C
  2.   C
  3.   A
  4.   D
  5.   B
  6.   B
  7.   100
  8.   C
  9.   0
10. A
11. C
12. B
13. 3.5 or
14. C
15. C
16. D
17. D
18. 1
19. A
20. C
     21. D
     22. 4

    Total: ____ / 22




Adaptive Digital SAT Score Estimator
This streamlined guide will give you an approximation of the score you
would earn on the Digital SAT. On the actual Digital SAT, there will be
some small but important differences in how the test will be scored. First,
there will be two experimental questions on each module that will be
omitted. You will almost certainly be unable to determine which questions
are experimental, so just do your best on every single question. In this
guide, we are making every question count to simplify your estimation.
Second, the Digital SAT will utilize “Item Response Theory” in its scoring.
Certain questions may have more weight on your performance than others.
More information about the precise scoring guidelines should be available
in the fall of 2023—check on collegeboard.org for the latest information.

* Be sure you look at the correct chart depending on whether you did
Module 2A or 2B for each section. *

Reading and Writing Scoring Charts

Use this table if you did Reading and Writing Modules 1 and 2A.

Tally the number of correct answers from the entire Reading and Writing
section (out of 54) to find your Reading and Writing section score. Since
you would have to miss at least ten questions to move to Module 2A, the
table ends at a maximum of 44 questions correct.
  Number of      Reading and
   Correct       Writing Test
 Reading and     Score (Out of
   Writing           800)
Questions (Out
    of 54)
      0               200
      1               210
      2               220
      3               230
      4               240
      5               250
      6               260
      7               270
      8               280
      9               290
      10              300
      11              310
      12              320
      13              330
      14              340
      15              350
      16              360
      17              370
      18              380
      19              390
      20              400
      21              410
      22              420
      23              430
      24              440
      25              450
                           26                 460
                           27                 470
                           28                 480
                           29                 490
                           30                 500
                           31                 510
                           32                 520
                           33                 530
                           34                 540
                           35                 550
                           36                 560
                           37                 570
                           38                 580
                           39                 590
                           40                 610
                           41                 620
                           42                 630
                           43                 640
                           44                 650



Use this table if you did Reading and Writing Modules 1 and 2B.

Tally the number of correct answers from the entire Reading and Writing
section (out of 54) to find your Reading and Writing section score. Since
you would need to answer at least 18 questions on the first module correctly
to do Module 2, the table starts at 18 questions correct as the minimum.


                      Number of         Reading and
                       Correct          Writing Test
                     Reading and        Score (Out of
                       Writing              800)
Questions (Out
    of 54)
      18         450
      19         460
      20         470
      21         480
      22         490
      23         500
      24         510
      25         520
      26         530
      27         540
      28         550
      29         560
      30         570
      31         580
      32         590
      33         600
      34         610
      35         620
      36         630
      37         640
      38         650
      39         660
      40         670
      41         680
      42         690
      43         700
      44         710
      45         720
      46         730
      47         740
                           48                 750
                           49                 760
                           50                 770
                           51                 780
                           52                 790
                           53                 800
                           54                 800



Math Scoring Charts

Use this table if you did Math Modules 1 and 2A.

Tally the number of correct answers from the entire Math section (out of
44) to find your Math section score. Since you would have to miss at least
nine questions to move to Module 2A, the table ends at a maximum of 35
questions correct.


                     Number of
                    Correct Math        Math Section
                    Questions (Out      Score (Out of
                        of 44)              800)
                            0                 200
                            1                 220
                            2                 230
                            3                 240
                            4                 250
                            5                 280
                            6                 300
                            7                 320
                            8                 340
                            9                 350
                           10                 360
                            11                 380
                            12                 390
                            13                 400
                            14                 410
                            15                 430
                            16                 440
                            17                 450
                            18                 460
                            19                 480
                            20                 490
                            21                 500
                            22                 510
                            23                 520
                            24                 530
                            25                 540
                            26                 550
                            27                 560
                            28                 570
                            29                 580
                            30                 590
                            31                 600
                            32                 610
                            33                 620
                            34                 630
                            35                 650



Use this table if you did Math Modules 1 and 2B.

Tally the number of correct answers from the entire Math section (out of
44) to find your Math section score. Since you would need to answer at
least 14 questions on the first module correctly to do Module 2, the table
starts at 14 questions correct as the minimum.
 Number of
Correct Math     Math Section
Questions (Out   Score (Out of
    of 44)           800)
      14              450
      15              460
      16              480
      17              490
      18              510
      19              520
      20              530
      21              550
      22              560
      23              570
      24              580
      25              590
      26              610
      27              620
      28              630
      29              640
      30              650
      31              670
      32              680
      33              690
      34              700
      35              710
      36              720
      37              730
      38              740
      39              750
      40              760
      41              770
                            42                 780
                            43                 790
                            44                 800



Add the Reading and Writing Section Score and the Math Section Score to
find your approximate total SAT test score:

_____________ Reading and Writing Section Score +

_____________ Math Section Score =

_____________ Total Approximate SAT Test Score (between 400 and
1600)

Approximate your testing percentiles (1st to 99th) using this chart:




Answer Explanations
Reading and Writing
Module 1
 1. (D) “Building” is the most appropriate of these options to describe
    growing a group of viewers for social media content.
    “Manufacturing” and “fabricating” are better used when describing
    building physical, tangible objects. “Escalating” means to increase,
    not to necessarily build something.
 2. (A) “In the company of” means to hang out with someone; that is the
    most logical meaning to have in this context, since Matsuo was
    hanging out with the lord’s son. The other options all have to do with
    business practices.
 3. (A) “Modify” means to “change,” which makes the most sense given
    that the scientists changed the benzene reaction in a way that
    maintained the original product but did not add the undesired
    sidechains. “Expunge” and “oust” would be to “eliminate” the
    reaction, which is not what is expressed. It is not “proposed” because
    this was actually implemented, not just considered.
 4. (B) Based on the context, “spurred” is most logical, since it means
    “inspired.” Choice (D) is in the incorrect tense, and (A) and (C) do
    not convey the precise meaning needed.
 5. (A) The text describes the transcription process, stating that the
    introns are “extracted and degraded” so choice (A) is the correct
    answer. The exons are translated, but the word excised is specifically
    referring to the introns. The exons are not “coded” into some sort of
    language, nor are they “mutated” or changed into something else.
 6. (D) The text starts by introducing the initiative of the LEAP program,
    then proceeds to give national survey results that show the relevance
    of the LEAP program’s goals to meeting the needs of employers, i.e.,
    demonstrating the economic relevance of the program. It is not (A)
    because an outline of a liberal arts curriculum would require more
    details about coursework and timeframes. It is not (B) because a
    historical survey would look at multiple historical events over a
    period of time. It is not C because the writer is using statistics to
    support, not refute, the claim.
 7. (D) Text 1 focuses on the shift from non-online learning to online
    learning especially in terms of the growing recognition of online
    professional certifications, and the information in Text 2 shows how
    any concerns about costs being a barrier are increasingly negated
    since there are so many free learning options. Thus, choice (D) makes
    sense because if the cost barriers to online education are reduced, the
    popularity of online certifications will likely increase. It is not (A)
    because having inexpensive learning options would be a plus, not a
    potential threat. It is not (B) because the focus is on online education,
    not in-person. It is not (C) because it can reasonably be inferred that if
    more people have access to free educational opportunities to learn
    relevant job skills, this would likely help businesses because they
    would have more access to qualified workers.
 8. (B) In considering his legacy, the narrator notes that he will not leave
    a “wealthy bequest” or a “labor-saving machine,” but will instead
    leave “carols” for “comrades and lovers.” So, the narrator has
    apparently prioritized making human connections instead of
    achievements like wealth and inventions that are more tangible. It is
    not (A) because the narrator is not suggesting that one of these options
    is better than another; instead, he is noting what he himself has done.
    It is not (C) because this would not represent a main idea of the text. It
    is not (D) because the narrator has evidently created “carols”
    “vibrating through the air” and makes no reference to technology
    being needed to create these.
 9. (B) Joe Dillon is the character who introduces the narrator to the Wild
    West stories. He is described as playing fiercely with the other
    children and consistently winning their war games, making choice (B)
    correct. He doesn’t ever allow the enemy side to win, so choices (A)
    and (C) can be ruled out. No evidence is provided to support choice
    (D).
10. (A) The teacher claims that the narrator expresses a deep personal
     feeling of melancholy, which the quotation in choice (A) clearly
     shows. This selection mentions the “freezings” the narrator has felt,
     the “dark days” seen, and a sense of “bareness everywhere.” The
     other options use language that is more positive or at least neutral—
     they do not approach the negativity found in (A).
11. (D) A major issue that astronauts have, as described in the text, is that
     they “suffer from cardiac atrophy as a response to immobility.” The
     author explains that bears do not suffer from cardiac atrophy even
     after months of hibernation. The author therefore thinks that bears
     may be the key to solving cardiac atrophy in astronauts. If, however,
     bears have the same response to time in space that humans have, then
     this line of scientific inquiry would not be helpful. This makes (D) the
     best answer. Choice (A) is incorrect as this would be a good reason to
     further study bears and how they might help astronauts. Choice (B) is
     incorrect as the author is not a proponent of human hibernation.
     Choice (C) is incorrect as this does not relate to the study of bears to
     help astronauts.
12. (B) The consumer researcher makes the claim that the prices of
     organic crops can often be substantially higher than those of
     conventionally raised crops. Choice (B) best supports this claim, since
     it accurately notes that between 2010 and 2014, organic soybeans are
     consistently about twice the price of conventional soybeans. It is not
     (A) because this doesn’t mention a price differential. It is not (C) or
     (D) because these options only discuss organic crops.
13. (C) In choice (C), we learn that because of Daisy’s visit to the school,
     a young man was suspended indefinitely because of his actions
     against the minority students. This makes choice (C) the best option
     as it shows that Daisy convinced the administration to make this
     suspension. Choices (A) and (B) simply show Daisy’s beliefs and the
     facts of the situation, not that she persuaded anyone of them. Choice
     (D) shows that the president is willing to visit, not that Daisy has
     convinced him of anything.
14. (C) The political scientist wants to show that even if a presidential
     candidate wins more popular votes than any other candidate, but still
     has less than an outright majority, the candidate can still win a
     majority of the electoral votes. Choice (C) demonstrates this because
     it shows how Wilson won a plurality of the popular vote but a large
     majority of the electoral vote. Choice (A) does not tell us anything
     about the election winner. Choice (B) focuses on parties that only won
     a small percentage of the votes. Choice (D) talks about the second-
     place candidate instead of the winner.
15. (C) The final sentence of the text is elaborating on specific examples
     of extrinsic motivators. Based on the previous sentence, “avoiding
     consequences” could be an extrinsic motivator, making “following the
     law to avoid being arrested” an excellent option. The other options are
     all examples of intrinsic motivators as described earlier in the text.
16. (C) “But” provides a transition between the two independent clauses
     in the sentence, making a single comma an appropriate way to join
     these two clauses. Choice (A) is too choppy, choice (B) places the
     comma after the “but” instead of before, and choice (D) needs a pause
     partway through the sentence.
17. (D) “Their” goes along with “cats” in showing the possession that the
     cats have for “way.” Choices (A) and (B) are used for singular
     substitutions, and choice (C) is used to show a location.
18. (D) The colon provides the best option to give a pause before the
     clarification is provided. Also, the apostrophe in “it’s” is used
     correctly since this stands for “it is.” Choices (A) and (C) incorrectly
     use the possessive form “its.” Choice (B) gives a comma splice—a
     comma by itself is not sufficient to join two complete sentences.
19. (C) “Took off” is the only option that correctly uses the past tense,
     which is correct given the past tense of other nearby verbs like
     “founded,” “started,” and “believed.”
20. (D) No commas are needed to break up this phrase, making choice (D)
     correct. Choice (A) uses a semicolon without a complete sentence
     after it. Choice (B) inappropriately breaks up the phrase “provide . . .
     with.” Choice (C) is far too choppy.
21. (C) The subject in the sentence is “process,” which is singular. Choice
     (C) is the only option that provides a singular verb to make this a
     complete sentence.
22. (B) Choice (B) uses dashes to set aside the definition of what a stage
     is. Choice (A) only punctuates one side of the definition. Choice (C)
     does not provide any punctuation. Choice (D) inconsistently
     punctuates the definition.
23. (D) “Since” is the only transition that shows a cause-and-effect
     relationship between the fact that platypuses break down their food
     using gravel and dirt from the water and the fact that grinding plates
     in their bills enable this to take place. The other options do not show a
     cause-and-effect relationship.
24. (C) “Instead” is the only option that provides a contrasting transition
     between the statement that soap does not merely kill lethal bacteria
     and the statement that it removes all germs. “Also” and “additionally”
     both transition into continuations of the same idea, while “granted”
     would transition into an acknowledgement of an objection.
25. (C) Since the student wants to present general information about
     Dayton to an audience that does not know much about Dayton, it
     makes the most sense for the student to focus on broad facts about the
     city. Choice (C) accomplishes this goal since it generalizes about how
     Dayton is home to many useful inventions. The other options are all
     too specific in focusing on particular Daytonian inventors and
     inventions instead of on providing a broad introductory overview.
26. (A) The student wants to show how a common assumption that people
     have about piranhas only eating animals is incorrect. Stating that
     some piranhas do in fact eat only plants would directly address this
     misconception. Choice (B) does not address the piranha diet. Choice
     (C) does not make sense because blood would also be an animal
     product. Choice (D) is inconsistent with the information in the text.
27. (B) The astronomers are concerned about the “dangers of a large
     asteroid strike on Earth.” A constructive strategy dealing with this
     problem would be to have a plan in place to prevent such a strike from
     happening. Based on the notes, a constructive strategy would be to
     build upon the success that NASA had in modifying the orbit of a
     small asteroid. After all, if a small asteroid could be manipulated, it is
    possible that a larger one could also be manipulated. It is not (A)
    because this is too extreme in its negativity. It is not (C) because this
    is more alarmist than constructive. It is not (D) because this would
    dismiss instead of addressing the concerns of the astronomers.

Module 2A
 1. (D) In this sentence, Juan is “ignoring” the jealous comments of his
    friends; the word “dismissed” would be an excellent substitute. It is
    not “reduced” or “forgot,” because he devotes some thought to what
    they said. It is not “conceded” because that would mean he would
    admit the truth of the jealous claims of his peers.
 2. (D) Camouflage would prevent potential prey from spotting the
    approaching servals since the prey would not be able to “detect” the
    servals. “Pictured” and “envision” involve more hypothetical
    visualization, and “ignored” is the opposite of the intended meaning.
 3. (C) The spectators are bringing up ideas for consideration—thus
    “raised” would make sense, since the spectators are sharing ideas, not
    physical objects. It is not “increased” because someone cannot
    increase a speaking point. It is not “elevated” because while elevate
    can be used to refer to raising things in other contexts, it cannot
    properly be used here to refer to bringing up a point. It is not
    “nourished” because the spectators are not feeding several points—
    they are stating them.
 4. (C) The text refers to “breaking the fat into three different chains,” so
    separating is the closest word meaning. “Flouting” means “defying.”
    “Elimination” would imply that the fat was removed instead of
    divided. “Categorizing” is a close synonym but indicates a classifying
    of parts.
 5. (C) “Landscape” most appropriately describes the land in which the
    platypuses were prevalent. A panorama is more of a scenic view. A
    perspective is more of a point of view. Agriculture would not have
    been associated with the nonhuman activities so long ago.
 6. (D) “Troubled” is the best choice since the narrator is thinking about a
    “most miserable thing.” Choice (A) is too strong of a word since there
    is no evidence that the narrator has become physically ill. (B) and (C)
    inaccurately portray the narrator’s shame as a power or strong point.
 7. (A) The text refers presents that influenza remains a viable threat, and
    because of its unique disposition, is likely to stay that way. Choices
    (B) and (D) state the opposite, arguing instead that the virus is likely
    to be killed off and is essentially harmless. Choice (C) is not correct
    because influenza’s inability to be conquered, not its severity is what
    makes it unique.
 8. (B) The text starts with the phrase “The wheel of progress moves
    onward.” This part of the topic sentence sets up the rest of the text to
    talk about what Stanton sees as inevitable progress and the embrace
    thereof. This makes choice (B) the best option. Andrew Johnson is
    only an example, not the main message, so choice (A) is incorrect.
    Choice (C) is the opposite of her message—she believes that people
    should embrace change and shift the status quo. Choice (D) is
    incorrect as she is not discussing animal examples.
 9. (C) The court observed that if students are in segregated schools, they
    face an inherent disadvantage when compared to students at
    integrated schools. Choice (C) directly and specifically illustrates this
    claim by connecting legal segregation to a delay in educational and
    mental development. It is not (A) because it is too vague. It is not (B)
    because this refers to earlier thinking that separate facilities could be
    equal. It is not (D) because the disposition is not clarified.
10. (C) The researcher claims that probiotics that must be refrigerated are
     ill-suited for stomach digestion. Choice (C) would directly support
     this claim since it gives specific reasons why the bacteria that prefer a
     cold environment would be harmed by the stomach conditions. It is
     not (A) because this option does not relate to probiotics that need to
     be kept cold. It is not (B) because the warmth from a beverage may
     not be the same as the warmth in a stomach. It is not (D) because
     antibiotics are not the same as probiotics, so generalizations about
     antibiotics would not necessarily be applicable to probiotics.
11. (A) To support the idea that traumatic brain injuries are more likely to
     come from less dramatic, home-based injuries, choice (A) is the best
     option, as it refers to “falls and unintentional blunt trauma” that cause
     the majority of traumatic brain injuries. It is not (B) because this does
     not refer to less dramatic injuries. It is not (C) because it does not
     consider other sources like unintentional blunt trauma. It is not (D)
     because both of these sources of injuries are rather violent.
12. (A) The final sentence contrasts with the previous sentence, which
     states that there are times when handwashing is quite necessary.
     Therefore, acknowledging that living in a constantly sterile
     environment is “not necessary” makes the most sense. Choices (B)
     and (D) state the opposite of the needed meaning, and choice (C) is
     ambivalent.
13. (D) The text refers to MLM as a “new type of scheme” that was
     “designed to pad the pockets of a select few.” So, the narrator clearly
     has a negative opinion of MLM; thus, choice (D) makes sense
     because it describes MLM quite skeptically. Choices (A) and (B)
     express a more positive attitude towards MLM, which is not
     supported by the text. Choice (C) incorrectly connects the present-day
     MLM to its introduction in the World War II era.
14. (B) The text is outlining the evolution of the concept of a chemical
     element. The final sentence alludes to how Boyle’s long-lasting
     definition was eventually replaced after dominating scientific thinking
     for 300 years. Referring to “the discovery of subatomic particles in
     the 20th century” would make the most sense as an option, since it
     aligns with the chemistry focus of the text and matches the timeline
     coming 300 years after the 17th century. The other options do not
     connect to either chemistry or to the timeline.
15. (A) “Has” is both consistent with the singular subject of “it” and with
     the timeframe of the past leading up to the present day, making the
     present perfect tense correct. Choices (B) and (D) are plural, and
     choice (C) would use the past perfect, which would not indicate that
     this sport continues up to the present day.
16. (C) Use a comma to separate the complete sentence from the phrase
     that follows. It is not choices (A) or (D) because what follows is not a
     complete sentence. It is not (B) because a brief pause is needed.
17. (D) “It can be quite demoralizing” is the only option to put the words
     in a logical sequence. The other options place the subject, “it,” later in
     the phrase, making the phrase confusing to the reader.
18. (D) Since just two questions are asked, there is no need for any
     punctuation to break up the sentence. All the other options
     inappropriately incorporate extra punctuation.
19. (D) “Feel” works along with the future tense to say they will feel;
     “felt” is in the past tense and would be inconsistent with the other
     verbs in the sentence. Also, the correct phrase is to “feel
     overwhelmed,” i.e., that one is intimidated by all the work one has to
     do. “Overwhelming” can be used to describe a situation—my work
     load is overwhelming—but not to describe how one feels.
20. (C) No punctuation is required in this sentence. Choice (A) does not
     have a complete sentence after the semicolon. Choice (B) uses the
     dash to provide an unnecessary, awkward pause. And (D)
     unnecessarily sets aside “engineer” with commas, suggesting a
     parenthetical that is not needed; without “engineer,” the sentence
     would not make sense.
21. (C) The difficult part here is that the correct answer simply looks odd,
     despite being flawless. A possessive form of understanding of the
     class is needed: “class’s” understanding is the proper way to illustrate
     this. Choice (A) is both plural and lacking an apostrophe. Choice (B)
     is an improper way to indicate possession. (D) indicates multiple
     “classes,” whereas there is actually only one class.
22. (B) We need a possessive word to serve as a stand-in for Truman and
     MacArthur. Eliminate choices (C) and (D) for being singular
     possessives. Eliminate (A) for not being a possessive at all. “Their” is
     the correct answer.
23. (C) The semicolon prevents a run-on sentence or comma splice; there
     is a complete sentence both before and after the semicolon. In
     addition to the key error of not breaking up two complete sentences,
     the other options have different problems: choice (A) has no breaks
     whatsoever, (B) has an unnecessary comma after “standing,” and (D)
     does not have an apostrophe with “Edith” to show possession.
24. (D) “As” provides the needed transition to show cause-and-effect in
     this situation—the chef wants to work on a part-time basis because
     they could have more flexible scheduling. The other options do not
     show a cause-and-effect relationship.
25. (C) “However” is the only option that provides a contrast between the
     idea that laws may be in place and the opposite idea that guest
     workers can’t take action when they experience unfair treatment.
26. (D) This option is the only one to specifically mention the leaders of
     the two armies at Gettysburg: Meade and Lee. Choice (A) is incorrect
     because Lincoln was not a general in command at the battle—Meade
     was. Choice (B) does not refer to the leaders. Choice (C) only
     mentions Lee.
27. (D) To calm a friend who is worried about psoriasis, the student would
     want to give the friend hope that if they had psoriasis, it should not be
     a cause for concern. Choice (D) correctly incorporates information
     from the notes, namely that “there are many treatment options.” The
     other options would all highlight negative aspects of psoriasis,
     contributing to the friend’s anxiety.

Module 2B
 1. (B) “Comply with” shows that people follow certain rules, which
    would be the logical choice given that they are agreeing to pay the
    fees. “Observe” is too passive, and “disobey” and “ignore” are the
    opposite of the intended meaning.
 2. (A) The text is arguing that music can help “prompt” or “trigger”
    memory, thereby helping in learning in a variety of areas. It is not a
    physical “souvenir.” It is not a way of speaking, like a “dialect.” It is
    not trying to brainwash people into a particular way of thinking, like
    “indoctrination.”
3. (D) The text as a whole describes Cullen in a positive light, so it
   makes sense to use “renowned,” which means “respected.”
   “Notorious” is too negative. “Imminent” describes something
   happening quickly. “Illustrated” is not supported by the passage since
   there is no mention of artwork accompanying his writings.
4. (B) The word “staple” takes on one of its less common definitions—it
   is not the physical staple that holds paper together; instead it signifies
   that the crop rotation is the “primary” choice for everyday soil
   management. It is not “periodic” because the text suggests that crop
   rotation is done consistently instead of occasionally. It is not
   “subsistent” because while subsistence has to do with food, the text is
   referring to the importance of crop rotation, not describing basic
   human nutrition. It is not (D) because this would put crop rotation in a
   negative light.
5. (D) “Impress upon” means to make someone understand something.
   In this case, the author is stating that students are rarely made to
   understand that the way to succeed in the stock market is through
   long-term, thoughtful investing. The students are not being “awarded”
   anything; nor are they having something “produced” for them. To
   “pan out” is to “end up” or “conclude,” and the author is not
   suggesting that students will necessarily end up a certain way—
   instead, they are emphasizing that students need to be made to
   understand a concept.
6. (A) We see earlier in the text that the dog regarded the sausage as
   “booty” to which he was entitled, and so consumed it. The
   justification given in this selection is disingenuous, since the true
   reason the dog behaved as he did was a desire for food. It is not
   choice (B) because this is not a true excuse. It is not (C) because the
   dog does not display curiosity for the truth, but rather attempts to hide
   the truth. It is not (D) because the dog does not seem to care about
   finding common ground with the bird.
7. (B) Throughout this text, the author presents information to support
   his claim that fermentation is not solely limited to anaerobic
   organisms. To do this, he extensively explains the reasons why a
     human cell might use anaerobic fermentation. This best fits with
     choice (B). Choice (A) is incorrect as the text implies that respiration
     is the primary process whereby humans obtain energy. Choice (C) is
     incorrect as the author says that vigorous exercise would increase the
     chance of fermentation taking place. Choice (D) is incorrect as the
     text makes clear that when human muscles use fermentation: it is in
     addition to respiration, not instead of it.
 8. (B) Although Clarinda continues to plead with her father, he states
    with a “terrible finality” that there is no other way than to proceed
    with meeting the bridegroom. Given that he no longer indulges her
    concerns and that he is rather abrupt, it makes sense to describe his
    attitude as “exasperated and dismissive.” While it is possible that he
    expressed some of the emotions described in the other options
    elsewhere in the novel, we do not find evidence of these in the excerpt
    we see. Ultimately, he does not want to argue with her and simply
    states what she must do.
 9. (C) The text states that, at minimum, Descartes can reject a concept if
    he finds “some ground for doubt.” Hence, (C) is his threshold for
    dismissal. Choices (A) and (B) suggest that Descartes would have to
    find a more considerable flaw. Finally, dismissing all knowledge as in
    (D) is not his goal—he wants to have knowledge so long as it is well-
    justified.
10. (D) The economist claims that most people who participate in a
     pyramid scheme are likely to make money. The table, however, shows
     that in a classic pyramid scheme, only about 12.49% of participants
     profit. 12.49% is far less than 50%, showing that the economist’s
     claim is incorrect. Choices (A) and (B) select information from the
     table that would support, not weaken, the economist’s claim. It is not
     (C) because this gives no information about the proportion of
     participants who profit.
11. (D) The student wants to show that the narrator realizes that light is
     necessary for shadows to exist. Choice (D) effectively illustrates this
     because in this selection, there is not sunlight because the sun was not
     yet up, and the shadow is “fast asleep in bed,” showing that it needs
     the light to come into existence. While the other options all mention
     shadows, they do not describe the light as a necessary accompaniment
     to shadows.
12. (D) The astronomers hypothesize that the roads and buildings at
     Chaco Canyon align with both the regular cycles of the sun and the
     complicated multi-year dance of the moon. The author acknowledges
     that it will take many years to confirm this hypothesis. Choice (D)
     would provide the best support for this hypothesis since it would
     show that there is a clear pattern in the way that the moon appears in
     the canyon walls. While the other options would provide interesting
     information about the history of Chaco Canyon, they would not
     provide evidence in support of there being a regular pattern
     demonstrating the architectural purpose of the buildings in the
     canyon.
13. (A) In the figure, the cells with an asterisk are cancerous. The reader
     can learn this by reading the paragraph under the figure. Every
     cancerous cell has a taller bar than the corresponding noncancerous
     cell. This shows the reader that cancerous cells have a higher average
     rate of change and makes choice (A) the best option. Choice (B) is the
     opposite of the relationship shown in the figure. Choice (C) is not
     supported by the figure except in the lung cells, which would not
     provide a sufficiently broad conclusion. Choice (D) is incorrect as no
     cells on the table have a rate of change of zero.
14. (D) Choice (D) is the best option because in this quotation the author
     shares a solution for ending the building of tenements: making them
     unprofitable. This leads us to the conclusion that they are only built
     because they are profitable. Choice (A) is incorrect as it discusses the
     desire to build tenement style houses, but not why the desire exists.
     Choice (B) is incorrect as it talks about the unchanging style of the
     tenements, but again, not about why they don’t change. Choice (C) is
     incorrect because it discusses the public perception of tenement
     houses, but not why they are built.
15. (A) The text contends that the range of effects associated with
     thalassemia is so broad because there is a redundancy, namely, four
     copies of the α globin gene. So, we can infer that the disorder would
     be more uniform, or consistent, if there were fewer copies. The text
     even suggests that the severity is based on how many copies of the
     gene are defective—one defective gene produces mild complications,
     while four defective genes would be lethal. Choice (B) would not
     change the scope of intensity. Choice (C) would likely increase the
     variation. Choice (D) does not make sense because the text gives no
     suggestion that less research on the human genome would relate to a
     greater uniformity of outcomes.
16. (D) A brief pause is needed after the introductory word “similarly.”
     Choices (A) and (B) do not have this needed pause, and both have an
     unnecessary pause in the middle of the selection. Choice (C)
     unnecessarily introduces a semicolon when there is not a complete
     sentence before it.
17. (C) This option puts the words in a logical order: “Cannon” should
     immediately begin the phrase because he was the one who graduated
     from the program in New Mexico. Choices (A) and (B) put “Cannon”
     later in the sentence, and choice (D) puts the phrase “studied briefly”
     later than it should be to maintain a logical flow.
18. (B) “Preferred” is correctly used as an adjective in this context,
     signifying that it is the type of food that the birds most strongly like.
     The other forms of “prefer” given in the answer options would
     typically be used as verbs.
19. (D) When using parentheses, treat the surrounding punctuation as
     though the parenthetical phrase were not even there. Choice (D)
     correctly does this by having a comma after the parenthetical phrase
     and before a needed clarification. Choice (A) incorrectly places a
     comma after “Dunn,” and choices (B) and (C) add an unnecessary
     comma after “first.”
20. (C) “Wreak havoc” means to cause destruction and chaos. The other
     options use improper phrasing. Choices (A) and (B) use “wreck”
     instead of “wreak,” and (D) uses the incorrect preposition “toward.”
21. (D) The phrase “through the CAM adaptation” could be removed from
     the sentence and the sentence would still be logical, so dashes on
     either side of the phrase would be appropriate in offsetting it. Choice
     (A) has the colon at an inappropriate spot that would cause the pause
     to be quite abrupt. Choice (B) uses inconsistent punctuation on either
     side of the parenthetical phrase. Choice (C) does not have a complete
     sentence after the semicolon.
22. (A) This is the only option that correctly surrounds the clarifying
     phrase with commas. Choices (B) and (D) do not surround the
     clarifying phrase with punctuation, and choice (C) places the
     punctuation after “many,” making it come too late to help the flow of
     the sentence.
23. (B) The narrator is arguing that fertilizers and herbicides have negative
     impacts and thus their use should be minimized. The text first justifies
     this by stating that herbicide and fertilizer use can be quite expensive.
     Then the text highlights the negative environmental consequences.
     Since this is an “additional” shortcoming of using chemicals in
     farming, “In addition” is the best option. The sentence is not showing
     a contrast as in choice (A). Choices (C) and (D) would show a cause-
     and-effect relationship, which is not supported by the context.
24. (A) The sentence prior to the needed insertion states that the human
     body comes with a variety of flaws. The insertion then needs to
     transition into the example of how humans cannot efficiently filter
     cholesterol from their blood. Thus, “for example” is the best option. It
     is not choices (B) or (D) because there is not a contrast. It is not (C)
     because this is not a “peripheral” or loosely related idea; instead, it
     provides an example that directly connects to the text.
25. (B) The student wants to suggest a type of person who would benefit if
     female trees were planted in their neighborhood. Based on the notes,
     female trees “absorb pollen out of the air and can help reduce allergy
     symptoms.” So, someone who had pollen allergies would very likely
     benefit from having mostly female tree plantings. It is not choice A
     because female trees produce nuts. It is not (C) because the text
     implies that all types of trees—both male and female—produce
     leaves. It is not (D) because female trees would produce fruit and so
     would not be helpful to someone trying to avoid fruit.
26. (B) Be sure to pick up on the “not” in the question—we want
     something that would not likely be part of the public domain.
     According to the notes, it will take 70 years after the death of a work’s
     author to be in the public domain. Also, if something is created
     privately it is not in the public domain. Therefore, a newly created
     private work would not be in the public domain, as in choice (B). It is
     not (A) because this is a publicly created work and would be in the
     public domain. It is not (C) or (D) because these options both suggest
     things that would be in the public domain. (Choice (C) is correct in
     terms of such a novel being in the public domain, while choice (D) is
     incorrect.)
27. (C) According to the notes, free will is when someone’s first-order
     desires and second-order desires align. For example, someone may
     have a first-order desire to eat junk food, but this would not align with
     a second-order desire to want to eat healthfully. If what the person
     wants to do aligns with what the person genuinely desires, then the
     person is acting freely. So, if someone genuinely wanted to eat more
     healthfully and actually feels like eating healthier foods, the person
     would be acting freely according to Frankfurt. A plausible reason why
     Frankfurt would not consider an animal to possess free will is that an
     animal may only be able to have straightforward wants without the
     ability to reflect on whether those wants are what it truly desires. So,
     choice (C) would make sense. It is not (A) because this would support
     that the animals have free will given their ability to reflect. It is not
     (B) because first-order desires would be needed to have second-order
     desires. It is not (D) because this would place humans and animals in
     the same category as far as having no capacity to reflect on whether
     certain wants are genuinely desirable.

Math

Module 1
1. (C) Distribute the      to simplify:




2. (210) 5% of 200 is found as follows:

                             0.05 × 200 = 10

   Then, add 10 to 200 to find the number that would be 5% greater than
   200:

                             10 + 200 = 210

3. (A) In 1970, the value of the price is clearly less than $500. The only
   option that is less than $500 is choice (A), $245.
4. (D) Use elimination to solve for a, which is the value of x in this series
   of equations. First, eliminate the x by multiplying the second equation
   by −2 and adding it to the first equation.




   Then, solve for y:
   Now, plug 1 in for y to one of the equations to solve for x. Use the
   second equation since it is simpler.



5. (B) Call x the original price of the book prior to the discount. Since
   there was a 10% discount, the price after the discount is applied is
   90% of the original price. So, set up an equation to solve for the
   original price:




6. (A) First, find the height of the actual Statue of Liberty in centimeters
   by multiplying 93 meters by 100 centimeters per meter:



   Then, find 1/500th of 9,300 to find the height of the model in
   centimeters:




   18.6 rounds up to 19 whole centimeters.
7. (C) Use easily visible points on the function to plug in values to
   determine the correct equation. First, try the point (0, 1) into the
   equations to see what can be eliminated.
   (A) f(x) = x2 → 1 ≠ 02 so (A) is incorrect.
   (B) f(x) = x2 + 1 → 1 = 02 + 1 so (B) is a possibility.
   (C) f(x) = 2x → 1 = 20 so (C) is a possibility.
   (D) f(x) = 3x + 1 → 1 = 30 + 1 → 1 ≠ 2, so (D) is incorrect.
     Now, try the point (2, 4) with options (B) and (C):

     (B) f(x) = x2 + 1 → 4 ≠ 22 + 1 so (B) is incorrect.
     (C) f(x) = 2x → 4 = 22 so (C) is correct.

     Alternatively, you could graph each of the answers using the Desmos
     calculator embedded in the math test to visualize the different
     functions.
 8. (40)




     The area of a parallelogram is the base multiplied by the height. The
     base of the parallelogram is 10, and the height is 4 since it is part of a
     3-4-5 special right triangle. Therefore, the area of the parallelogram is
     4 × 10 = 40 square units.
 9. (B) Manipulate the equation to get R by itself:




10. (B) Plug in 2 for x and 17 for y, then solve for b:
11. (300) Divide 3,000 miles by 10 hours to solve for the speed in miles
     per hour:




12. (1) Use elimination to solve for y. Multiply the top equation by − 2 so
     you can eliminate the x values when you add the equations together:



     Then, add this equation to the second equation to eliminate the x
     values:




     Then, solve for y:



     So, the value of y is equal to 1.
13. (D) Use x as the capacity for the smaller bag, and y as the capacity for
     the larger bag. Set up two equations to solve. First, make an equation
     that expresses the capacities in terms of each other:




     Then, make an equation expressing the total capacity of the two bags:



     Then, simplify and use substitution to solve for the capacity of the
     smaller bag, x:
     Plug 3x into the second equation to solve:



     So, the capacity of the smaller bag is 20 liters.
14. (B) Use the fact that f(2) = 8 to find what the constant C is. According
     to the table, f(2) = 2C. So, solve for C:




     Now that we know that C = 3, we can solve for f(3):



15. (10) Let h represent the height of the triangle and let b represent the
     width of the base of the triangle. Express the idea that the height of
     the triangle is twice its width with this equation:



     The formula to calculate the area of a triangle is    . Substitute
     25 for the area and      from manipulating the above equation, then
     solve for the height:




     The height is therefore 10 units.
16. (A) Look at the differences among the answer choices to save yourself
     time. We need a function that will show an exponential increase over
     time. In the function I(T) = 2 × (1.5)T, as T increases, I(T) would also
     increase at an exponential rate. With all of the other options, however,
     as T increases, the value of I(T) would consistently decrease. Choice
     (B) would involve multiplying by an ever-smaller fraction, and
     choices (C) and (D) would involve dividing by ever-larger numbers.
     So, the only logical option is choice (A).
17. (D) Take the 300 cubic meters and multiply it by the density for steel,
     7,850 kilograms per cubic meter, to get the total mass of the wall:



18. (65.8) Calculate the total height of the seven boys by using the mean
     formula and solving for the sum:




     Now, subtract the height of 74 from the total:



     Finally, find the mean of the six boys using 395 as the sum:




19. (B) ∠X and (90 − ∠X) are complementary angles, since they would
     add up to 90 degrees. Recall that the sine of one angle is equal to the
     cosine of the angle that is complementary to it; similarly, the cosine of
     one angle is equal to the sine of the angle that is complementary to it.
     Thus, the sine of (90 − ∠X) will simply be the same as the cosine of
            .
20. (B) Factor the expression to determine what would be factors:
     So, choices (A), (C), and (D) would all be factors. Choice (B), x − 7,
     would not be, so choice (B) is correct.



21. (B) Since the cards are returned to the set after each selection, the total
     number of choices will remain at 10. So, the probability that someone
     would pick a 9 on this selection would simply be .
22. (D) Simplify the equation to visualize what is happening:




     If the constant a is greater than 2, then 3a would be greater than 6.
     This would result in an absurd situation since the equation would no
     longer express an equivalence. For example, if a were 3 (a value
     greater than 2), look at what happens to the equation:




     Thus, the equation would have no solutions if the constant a is greater
     than 2.

Module 2A
 1. (A) Put the equation into slope-intercept form, y = mx + b to solve for
    the value of the y-intercept, b:
   So, the value of the y-intercept is − 5.
2. (C) Since there are 20 students, find the number of the servings by the
   10th and 11th students to see the median of the set. The values are
   already in order, so you can see that the 10th and 11th terms are both
   6. Therefore, the median of the set is 6.
3. (B)




4. (B) Two points that are easy to identify are (−6, 0) and (0, 4). So, take
   the slope using these two points.




4. (A) Since the total distance of the trail is 300 and Walter has already
   traveled 100 miles, he has 300 − 100 = 200 miles remaining on his
   journey. Use the equation                     to solve.

   He has to travel a total of 200 miles in D days, and we are solving for
   the m miles per day he is travelling. So, the equation will be:




6. (A) Distribute and simplify:
7. (D) In the function C(m) = 10m + 10,000, the 10,000 represents the
   fixed cost to run the restaurant, and the 10 represents the additional
   cost to the restaurant for each additional meal. If no meals were
   served, the total cost would be $10,000. If one meal were served, the
   total cost would be $10,010. If two meals were served, the total cost
   would be $10,020. So, the cost is going up by $10 for each additional
   meal sold.
8. (A) Put the equation y + 2 = −x in slope-intercept form, y = mx + b:




   The equation therefore has a slope of −2 and a y-intercept of −4. This
   corresponds to choice (A), as graphed below:
9. (B) Subtract the fractions from 1 (which represents the total set of
   voters) to find the fraction of voters who do not like either candidate:




   Put everything in terms of the least common denominator, 6:




   So, the probability that a randomly selected voter will like neither
   candidate is .
10. (50) Let x represent the number of forks, and y represent the number of
     spoons. The first equation could be for the total number of forks and
     spoons:



     The second equation would show the ratio of forks to spoons:




     Now, simplify the second equation and substitute into the first
     equation to solve for x.




     Plug 0.6x in for y in the first equation:




     So, there are 50 forks in the drawer.
11. (A) Between the hours of 7 a.m. and 9 a.m., the traffic density
     increases from 20 vehicles per mile per lane to 40 vehicles per mile
     per lane. This is the largest increase in traffic density between any of
     the intervals.
12. (B) Plug the second inequality x ≤ −y − 2 into y + 10 ≤ 3x and
     simplify:
     So, the largest possible value for y is found when y = −4.
13. (C) Since the cashier accidentally subtracted the sales tax from the
     price of the meal, the new percentage will be 100% − 7% = 93%.
     Therefore, the price of the meal in terms of x will be 0.93x.
14. (35) Call x the number of minutes for Ken’s morning commute. The
     commute in the evening would be x + 25. So, add the morning and
     evening commute times together to equal the 95 total minutes, then
     solve for x:




     So, the number of minutes for the morning commute is 35.
15. (B) Plug 2 in for x to find the value of f(2):




16. (3) The volume formula for a right rectangular prism is L × W × H =
     V. Since we already know the volume of the prism and the product of
     the length and width, we can set up a formula like this to solve for the
     prism’s height:




     So, the height of the prism is 3 inches.
17. (1) Factor the equation to solve for the possible values of x:
     The possible values of x are therefore −4 and 5 since each of these
     would make the entire left-hand side of the equation equal to zero.
     Then, add −4 and 5 to find the sum:



18. (B) Set up a proportion to solve for the number of residents, x, who
     voted no. There are 360 degrees total in a circle, so make the
     proportion have degrees on one side and residents on the other:




     So, there are 100 residents who voted no on the levy.
19. (B) Use the density formula                    plugging in 2 kilograms
     for the mass and 8 liters for the volume:




20. (B) Take 35, divide it by 70, and multiply the result by 100 to
     determine what percentage 35 is of 70:




21. (5) Find the equation of the new line by calculating is slope—we
     already know that the y-intercept is 4. Take the negative reciprocal of
     the slope of the first line, −3, by flipping it and changing the sign.
     So, the equation of the new line is           . Calculate the value of a
     point on this line when the x value is 3 by plugging 3 in for x:




     The y value will thus be 5 for this point.
22. (A) While you could solve for the length of AB by using the
     Pythagorean triple, it will be easier if you recognize that this triangle
     represents a Pythagorean triple: 7, 24, and 25. With the hypotenuse at
     25, the cosine of ∠ABC will be:




Module 2B
 1. (C) Plug 15 degrees in for T to solve for the corresponding speed:




 2. (C) Since this line is written in slope-intercept form, y = mx + b,
    recognize that the slope is going to be a. A line that is perpendicular
    to this one will have a slope that is the negative reciprocal of     .
    The only option that has this as its slope is choice (C).
 3. (A) When dividing exponential expression that have the same base,
    subtract the exponents from one another:
   The square root of x is equivalent to   . Substitute this in to the
   equation and simplify:




   So, x = 1.
4. (D) Convert the miles per hour to feet per second by cancelling out
   terms:




   This corresponds to choice (D).
5. (B) For the equation to have infinitely many solutions, the two sides
   of the equation should be equivalent. Simplify the left-hand side by
   dividing everything on that side by 2:




   So, for the equation to have equivalent sides, the constant k must
   equal −3.
6. (B) For an absolute value equation 3 = |x − 1|, set up two separate
   equations to represent both the possible positive and negative values
   of what is inside the absolute value symbol:
   Equation 1:



   Equation 2:



   So, there will be two solutions to the equation, 4 and −2.
7. (100) Since the heartbeats and breaths have a linear relationship, you
   can solve for the number of heartbeats per minute by noticing that the
   breaths go up by 3 for every increase of 10 heartbeats per minute. So,
   if Baahir breathes 24 breaths per minute, add 10 + 10 to 80 to get 100
   heartbeats for minute as his pulse.
8. (C) Factor the function to identify its zeros:



   So, the function will intersect the x-axis at x values of 4 and −1.
   Therefore, there are two points at which the function will intersect the
   x-axis.
9. (0) For the function f(x) to intercept the y-axis, it must have a value of
   0 for x. Here is what the function looks like when graphed:
     So, do not overthink this question—x simply needs to be 0 for the
     function to intercept the y-axis.
10. (A) The population of the city is decreasing exponentially, so choices
     (C) and (D) can be eliminated since they would model exponential
     increase. Choice (A) portrays the correct initial population of 50,000
     and correctly models a 10% decrease by multiplying by 0.9. Choice
     (B) has an incorrect initial population and far too great an exponential
     decrease.
11. (C) Since this is an isosceles triangle, the angles that are opposite the
     congruent sides are equivalent. So, angle C has a measure of n.




     All of the internal angles in a triangle add up to 180 degrees, so solve
     for n to find the measure of angle C:
     Thus, the measure of ∠C is 45°.
12. (B) The standard deviation for set A would be greater than that for set
     B, since in set A, the values are clustered towards greater and lesser
     numbers, while in set B, the values are clustered around the average.
     Since the standard deviation corresponds to the typical deviation from
     the average, it would be much greater in Set A than in Set B. The
     range would be the same from set to set, and based on estimating from
     the graph, the mean and median would be relatively identical from set
     to set.
13. (3.5 or ) In a square with a diagonal of 7 units, the sides are 7 units
     long since the triangle formed by two sides and the diagonal is a 45-
     45-90 triangle, which would have sides in a ratio of x, x, x .




     So, the largest possible circle that would fit within the square would
     have a diameter of 7 units, since it would go from one side to the
     other. Take half of 7 to find the radius: 3.5.
14. (C) Diana will need to walk an additional 4,000 steps since 10,000 −
     6,000 = 4,000. Since she walks 100 steps in a minute, determine the
     number of additional minutes she will need to walk by dividing 4,000
     by 100:




     Now, convert 40 minutes to hours:
     So, Diana will need to walk an additional     of an hour on Tuesday.

15. (C) The value of m is equivalent to the slope of the function. Since
     g(1) = 7 and g(3) = 11, use the ordered pairs (1, 7) and (3, 11) to
     calculate the slope of the line:




     So, the value of m is 2.
16. (D) The balloons both start at 200 feet in altitude. If one balloon
     increases its height by 30%, its new height will be 200 × 1.3 = 260
     feet. If the other balloon decreases its height by 15%, its new height
     will be 200(1 − 0.15) = 200(.85) = 170 feet. The different in height
     between the two balloons will then be 260 − 170 = 90 feet.
17. (D) Use the quadratic formula to approach this problem:




     If the value of b2 − 4ac is negative, there will be no real solutions to
     the problem since the equation would require you to take the square
     root of a negative number. So, see what values of b would make it
     such that there would be a negative value for b2 − 4ac.
     The equation 2 x2 + bx + 4 = 0 is already in quadratic form, so you
     can identify that a = 2, b = b, and c = 4 for the purposes of plugging
     numbers in to the quadratic formula. We can just look at the value of
     b2 − 4ac to determine what values of b would cause there to be only a
     negative value of the expression.
     Take the square root of both sides, adjusting for the potentially
     negative value of b:




     The option that expresses this range of possible values is |b| < 4 ,
     since the absolute value would account for both possible negative and
     positive values for b in this range.
18. (1) The function has zeros at x values of −3 and 5 based on the
     equation. Also, the function has a negative coefficient, which means
     the direction of the function is downwards. So, the maximum of the
     function will be found at an x value that is halfway between −3 and 5:
     1. You can see this in the graph of the function below:
19. (A) Use S as the number of small pizzas and L as the number of large
     pizzas. The total number of pizzas sold in a month must be less than
     800, so one inequality will be S + L < 800. The parlor needs to make
     at least $10,000, so calculate the total revenue from the small pizzas
     by multiplying each small pizza by 10 and calculate the total revenue
     from the large pizzas by multiplying each large pizza by 20. This total
     needs to be greater than or equal to 10,000. So, the second inequality
     will be 10S + 20L ≥ 10,000.
20. (A) Based on the definition of RO as provided in the question, an RO of
     4.2 means that one infected person will infect 4.2 other people. Thus,
     to determine the number of people that 20 people who are infected
     with a virus of RO of 4.2, simply multiply 4.2 by 20:
21. (D) Since the median of the set is currently 6, adding a number that is
     6 or greater would not change the median of the set. For example, if
     we added 6, the new set would be {2, 3, 6, 6, 6, 7}. This would still
     have a median of 6. If we add a number greater than 6, that too would
     be fine. For example, if we added 100 to the set, the set would be {2,
     3, 6, 6, 7, 100}. The median of the new set would still be 6. Therefore,
     the correct answer is x ≥ 6. It is not Choice (A) because this is not the
     “complete” set of potential values.
22. (4) The equation for a circle is (x − h)2 + (y − k)2 = r2, in which (h, k)
     is the center and r is the radius. Memorize this equation because the
     SAT does not give it to you. The diameter of a circle is twice that of
     its radius. Take the square root of 49 to find the radius of circle A:
              . The diameter of circle A will be twice seven: 14. Next, take
     the square root of 25 to find the radius of circle B:         . The
     diameter of circle B will be twice five: 10. Finally find the difference
     between the diameters of the two circles to arrive at the solution:
