The Princeton Review Publishing Team
Rob Franek, Editor-in-Chief
David Soto, Senior Director, Data Operations
Stephen Koch, Senior Manager, Data Operations
Deborah Weber, Director of Production
Jason Ullmeyer, Production Design Manager
Jennifer Chapman, Senior Production Artist
Selena Coppock, Director of Editorial
Orion McBean, Senior Editor
Aaron Riccio, Senior Editor
Meave Shelton, Senior Editor
Chris Chimera, Editor
Patricia Murphy, Editor
Laura Rose, Editor
Isabelle Appleton, Editorial Assistant

Penguin Random House Publishing Team
Tom Russell, VP, Publisher
Alison Stoltzfus, Publishing Director
Brett Wright, Senior Editor
Emily Hoffman, Assistant Managing Editor
Ellen Reed, Production Manager
Suzanne Lee, Designer
Eugenia Lo, Publishing Assistant

The Princeton Review
110 East 42nd Street, 7th Floor
New York, NY 10017

Copyright © 2023 by TPR Education IP Holdings, LLC. All rights reserved.

Published in the United States by Penguin Random House LLC, New York.

Terms of Service: The Princeton Review Online Companion Tools (“Student Tools”) for retail
books are available for only the two most recent editions of that book. Student Tools may be
activated only once per eligible book purchased for a total of 24 months of access. Activation
of Student Tools more than once per book is in direct violation of these Terms of Service and
may result in discontinuation of access to Student Tools Services.

ISBN 9780593516874
Ebook ISBN 9780593516881

SAT is a trademark registered by the College Board, which is not affiliated with, and does not
endorse, this product.

This book is the 2024 edition of Princeton Review SAT Prep. Some material in this book was
previously published in Princeton Review PSAT Prep 2024, a trade paperback respectively
published by Random House LLC in 2023.

The Princeton Review is not affiliated with Princeton University.

Editor: Chris Chimera
Production Editors: Sarah Litt and Kathy Carter
Production Artist: Deborah Weber

Cover art by imageBROKER / Alamy Stock Photo
Cover design by Suzanne Lee
Photo selection and layout by Carling Design, Inc.



         For customer service, please contact editorialsupport@review.com, and
         be sure to include:

              full title of the book

              ISBN

              page number



a_prh_6.0_144626033_c0_r0
Acknowledgments
An SAT course is much more than clever techniques and powerful computer
score reports. The reason our results are great is that our teachers care so
much about their students. Many teachers have gone out of their way to
improve the course, often going so far as to write their own materials, some
of which we have incorporated into our course manuals as well as into this
book. The list of these teachers could fill this page.

Special thanks to all those who contributed to this year’s edition: Kenneth
Brenner, Sara Kuperstein, Amy Minster, Scott O’Neal, Brittany Budzon,
Tania Capone, Remy Cosse, Stacey Cowap, Jennifer Daniels, Beth
Hollingsworth, Adam Keller, Ali Landreau, Aaron Lindh, Christine
Lindwall, Jomil London, Sweena Mangal, Sionainn Marcoux, Valerie
Meyers, Gabby Peterson, Denise Pollard, Kathy Ruppert, Jess Thomas,
Jimmy Williams, and Suzanne Wint.

We are also, as always, very appreciative of the time and attention given to
each page by Deborah Weber, Sarah Litt, and Kathy Carter.

Finally, we would like to thank the people who truly have taught us
everything we know about the SAT: our students.
Contents
Foreword
Get More (Free) Content


  Part I: Orientation
      1 The Digital SAT, The Princeton Review, and You
      2 Practice Test 1
      3 Practice Test 1: Answers and Explanations
      4 Cracking the Digital SAT: Basic Principles

  Part II: How to Crack the Reading and Writing Section
      5 Reading and Writing Introduction
           Find Your Strengths and Weaknesses
           The Lesser of Two (or Three) Evils
           Starting Off on the Right Side…of the Screen
      6 The Reading Questions
           SAT Reading: Cracking the Texts
           Steps of the Basic Approach
           Applying the Steps
           POE Criteria
      7 Reading Question Types 1–3: Craft and Structure
           Vocabulary
           Purpose
           Dual Texts
      8 Reading Question Types 4–8: Information and Ideas
  Retrieval
  Main Idea
  Claims
  Charts
  Conclusions
 9 Advanced Reading Skills
  Vocabulary: Playing the Greatest Hits
  Down to Two (or More): Mastering POE
  Poetry: Keeping Your Cool
  Sentence Function: Understanding Why Sentences are
  Included
10 Comprehensive Reading Drill
  Comprehensive Reading Drill Answers and Explanations
11 Introduction to Rules Questions
  Learn the Rules and Follow Them
  Tools for Rules
  What’s Changing in the Answers Drill
  What’s Changing in the Answers Drill Answers
12 Rules Questions: Complete Sentences
  What Does a Sentence Need?
  Answer in the Form of a Question
  The Perfect Form
  Complete Sentences Drill
  Complete Sentences Drill Answers and Explanations
13 Rules Questions: Describing Phrases
  Who or What Are You Talking About
  Extra! Extra! Put Punctuation Around It!
  Specifying vs. Extra Information Drill
  Specifying vs. Extra Information Drill Answers
  Describing Phrases Drill
  Describing Phrases Drill Answers and Explanations
14 Rules Questions: Linking Independent Clauses
  The Strongest Link
  Picking Sides with Transitions
  Linking Independent Clauses Drill
  Linking Independent Clauses Drill Answers and Explanations
15 Rules Questions: Dependent Clauses, Lists, and No
   Punctuation
  Every [Dependent Clause] Needs a Friend
  Independent vs. Dependent Clauses Drill
  Add It to Your List—Punctuation, That Is
  Don’t Go Where You’re Not Wanted—If You’re Punctuation
  Independent vs. Dependent Clauses Drill Answers
  Dependent Clauses, Lists, and No Punctuation Drill
  Dependent Clauses, Lists, and No Punctuation Drill Answers
  and Explanations
16 Rules Questions: Grammar
  Let’s Get Grammatical
  Verbs
  Subjects and Verbs Drill
  Verb Tense Drill
  Pronouns
  Nouns
  Modifiers
  Subjects and Verbs Drill Answers
  Verb Tense Drill Answers
    Grammar Drill
    Grammar Drill Answers and Explanations
 17 Rhetoric Questions
    A Smooth Transition
    Ready, Set…Synthesize
    Conclusion
    Rhetoric Drill
    Rhetoric Drill Answers and Explanations

Part III: How to Crack the Math Section
 18 Math Introduction
    The Math Breakdown
    Using the Online Tools and Scratch Paper
 19 Digital SAT Math: The Big Picture
    The Big Picture
    Ballparking
    Read the Final Question
    One Piece at a Time
    The Calculator
 20 Fun with Fundamentals
    The Building Blocks
    There Are Only Six Operations
    Fractions
    Decimals
    Exponents and Square Roots
    How to Read Charts and Graphs
    Fundamentals Drill
    Chapter Drill Answers and Explanations
21 Algebra: Cracking the System
   Digital SAT Algebra: Cracking the System
   Fundamentals of Digital SAT Algebra
   Solving Radical Equations
   Solving Rational Equations
   Solving for Expressions
   Solving Systems of Equations
   Solving Inequalities
   Writing Your Own Equations
   Simplifying Expressions
   Solving Quadratic Equations
   Growth and Decay
   When Values are Absolute
   Algebra Drill
   Chapter Drill Answers and Explanations
22 Other Digital SAT Algebra Strategies
   Princeton Review Algebra—AKA How to Avoid Algebra on the
   Digital SAT
   Plugging In the Answers (PITA)
   Solving Rational Equations
   Plugging In Your Own Numbers
   Meaning In Context
   Digital SAT Algebra Strategies Drill
   Chapter Drill Answers and Explanations
23 Functions and Graphs
   Call on the Calculator
   Function Fundamentals
   The Coordinate Plane
  Points on a Line
  Slope
  Equations of a Line
  Parallel and Perpendicular Lines
  Two Equations with Infinitely Many Solutions
  Two Equations with No Solutions
  Points of Intersection
  Call on the Calculator
  Graphing Functions
  Equations of a Parabola
  Equation of a Circle
  Functions and Graphs Drill
  Chapter Drill Answers and Explanations
24 Advanced Arithmetic
  Call on the Calculator
  Ratios and Proportions
  Percentages
  Fractions, Decimals, and Percents Drill
  Averages
  What Is a Median?
  What Is a Mode?
  What Is a Range?
  What is Margin of Error?
  What is a Frequency Table?
  What is a Standard Deviation?
  Probability.
  Rates
  Is There Science on the Digital SAT
    Advanced Arithmetic Drill
    Chapter Drill Answers and Explanations
 25 Geometry and Trigonometry
    Geometry on the Digital SAT
    Lines and Angles
    Triangles
    Circles
    Rectangles and Squares
    Volume
    Ballparking
    Plugging In
    Drill 1: Geometry
    Drill 2: Trigonometry
    Chapter Drill Answers and Explanations
 26 Fill-Ins
    What is a Fill-In?
    The Instructions
    Fill-Ins: A Test Drive
    More POOD
    Multiple Correct Answers
    Fill-In Drill
    Chapter Drill Answers and Explanations

Part IV: Taking the Digital SAT
Foreword
Welcome to The Princeton Review Digital SAT Prep! The Digital SAT is not
a test of aptitude, how good of a person you are, or how successful you will
be in life. The Digital SAT simply tests how well you take the Digital SAT.
And performing well on the Digital SAT is a skill, one that can be learned
like any other. The Princeton Review was founded more than 40 years ago on
this very simple idea, and—as our students’ test scores show—our approach
is the one that works.

Sure, you want to do well on the Digital SAT, but you don’t need to let the
test intimidate you. As you prepare, remember two important things that have
always been true about the SAT:

    It doesn’t measure the stuff that matters. It measures neither
    intelligence nor the depth and breadth of what you’re learning in high
    school. It doesn’t predict college grades as well as your high school
    grades do. Colleges know there is more to you as a student—and as a
    person—than what you do in a single 2-hour test administered on a
    random Saturday morning.

    It underpredicts the college performance of women, minorities, and
    disadvantaged students. Historically, women have done better than men
    in college but worse on the SAT. For a test that is used to help predict
    performance in college, that’s a pretty poor record.

Your preparation for the Digital SAT starts here. We at The Princeton
Review spend millions of dollars every year improving our methods and
materials so that students are always ready for the Digital SAT, and we’ll get
you ready too.
However, there is no magic pill: just buying this book isn’t going to improve
your scores. Solid score improvement takes commitment and effort from you.
If you read this book carefully and work through the problems and practice
tests included in the book, not only will you be well-versed in the format of
the Digital SAT and the concepts it tests, but you will also have a sound
overall strategy and a powerful arsenal of test-taking strategies that you can
apply to whatever you encounter on test day.

In addition to the comprehensive review in Digital SAT Prep, we’ve
included additional practice online, accessible through our website—
PrincetonReview.com—to continue helping you to improve your scores.
Before doing anything else, be sure to register your book at
PrincetonReview.com/prep. When you do, you’ll gain access to the most up-
to-date information on the Digital SAT, as well as more test prep and college
admissions resources.

The more you take advantage of the resources we’ve included in this book
and the online student tools that go with it, the better you’ll do on the test.
Read the book carefully and learn our strategies. Take the full-length practice
tests under actual timed conditions. Analyze your performance and focus your
efforts where you need improvement. Perhaps even study with a friend to
stay motivated. Attend a free event at The Princeton Review to learn more
about the Digital SAT and how it is used in the college admissions process.
Search our website for an event that will take place near you or take place
online!

This test is challenging, but you’re on the right track. We’ll be with you all
the way.

Good luck!
The Staff of The Princeton Review
1 Go to PrincetonReview.com/prep and enter the following ISBN
  for your book: 9780593516881




2 Answer a few simple questions to set up an exclusive Princeton
  Review account. (If you already have one, you can just log in.)
   3 Enjoy access to your FREE content!




Need to report a potential content issue?




Contact EditorialSupport@review.com and include:
   full title of the book
   ISBN
   page number


Need to report a technical issue?




Contact TPRStudentTech@review.com and provide:
   your full name
   email address used to register the book
   full book title and ISBN
   Operating system (Mac/PC) and browser (Chrome, Firefox,
   Safari, etc.)
LET’S GO MOBILE! Access all of these free, additional
resources by downloading the new Princeton Review app at
www.princetonreview.com/mobile/apps/highschool.


Once you’ve registered, you can…
   Access three practice Digital SAT exams as well as
   comprehensive scoring reports
   Check out our comprehensive study guides to help enhance your
   test prep
   Read our special “SAT Insider” and get valuable advice about the
   college application process, including tips for writing a great
essay and where to apply for financial aid
Online flashcards with key Reading and Writing and Math
concepts
Videos explanations of key in-book questions
Download printable bubble sheets for your in book test
Use our searchable rankings of The Best 389 Colleges to find out
more information about your dream school
Check to see if there have been any corrections or updates to
this edition
Get our take on any recent or pending updates to the Digital SAT



    Look For These Icons Throughout
               The Book

         Premium Portal


         Online Articles



         Online Practice Tests



         Proven Techniques



         Applied Strategies
Other References


Watch Us Crack It
Part I
Orientation
 1 The Digital SAT, The Princeton Review, and You
 2 Practice Test 1
 3 Practice Test 1: Answers and Explanations
 4 Cracking the Digital SAT: Basic Principles
LET’S GET THIS PARTY STARTED!
You are about to unlock a vast repertoire of powerful strategies that have one
and only one purpose: to help you get a better score on the Digital SAT. This
book contains the collected wisdom of The Princeton Review, which has
spent more than 40 years helping students achieve higher scores on
standardized tests. We’ve devoted millions of dollars and years of our lives
to beating the SAT. It’s what we do (twisted as it may be), and we want you
to benefit from our expertise.


WHAT IS THE PRINCETON REVIEW?
The Princeton Review is the leader in test prep. Our goal is to help students
everywhere crack the SAT and a bunch of other standardized tests, including
the PSAT and the ACT as well as graduate-level exams like the GRE and the
GMAT. Starting from humble beginnings in 1981, The Princeton Review is
now the nation’s largest SAT preparation company. We offer courses in more
than 500 locations in 20 different countries, as well as online; we also
publish best-selling books, like the one you’re holding, and online resources
to get students ready for this test.

Our techniques work. We developed them after spending countless hours
scrutinizing real SATs, analyzing them with computers, and proving our
theories in the classroom.
                 Welcome!
                 Welcome to the Premium Edition of SAT Prep. This
                 edition comes chock-full of awesome online
                 resources, including three Digital SAT practice tests,
                 as well as study guides, college admissions articles,
                 and more. See “Get More (Free) Content” on this
                 page for step-by-step instructions for accessing
                 your exclusive Premium tools. Happy test prepping!



The Princeton Review Way
This book will show you how to score higher on the Digital SAT by teaching
you to:

    extract important information from tricky test questions
    take full advantage of the limited time allowed
    systematically answer questions—even if you don’t fully understand
    them
    avoid the traps that the Digital SAT has laid for you (and use those traps
    to your advantage)

The test is written and administered by College Board, and they know that
our techniques work. For years, the test-writers claimed that the SAT
couldn’t be coached. But we’ve proven that view wrong, and they, in turn,
have struggled to find ways of changing the SAT so that The Princeton
Review won’t be able to crack it—in effect, acknowledging what our
students have known all along: that our techniques really do work. (In fact,
College Board has recently admitted that students can and should prepare for
the SAT. So there!) The SAT has remained highly vulnerable to our
techniques. And the current version of the SAT is even more susceptible to
our methods. Read this book, work through the drills, take the practice tests,
and you’ll see what we mean.

                 Study!
                 If you were getting ready to take a biology test, you’d
                 study biology. If you were preparing for a basketball
                 game, you’d practice basketball. So, if you’re
                 preparing for the SAT, you need to study and
                 practice for the SAT. The exam can’t test everything
                 you learn in school (in fact, it tests very little), so
                 concentrate on learning what it does test.
Chapter 1
The Digital SAT, The Princeton
Review, and You
Welcome! Our job is to help you get the best possible score on the Digital
SAT. This chapter will tell you what to expect from the Digital SAT as well
as some specifics about the test. It will also explain how to make the most of
all your Princeton Review materials.
GENERAL INFORMATION ABOUT THE
DIGITAL SAT
You may have bought this book because you know nothing about the Digital
SAT, or perhaps you took the SAT once and want to raise your score. Either
way, it’s important to know about the test and the people who write it. Let’s
take a second to discuss some Digital SAT facts, some of which may surprise
you.

What Is Tested on the Digital SAT?
Just because the Digital SAT features math, reading, and writing questions
doesn’t mean that it reflects what you learned in school. You can ace calculus
or write like Shakespeare and still struggle with the SAT. The test-writers
claim that the test predicts how well you will do in college by measuring
“reasoning ability,” but all the Digital SAT really measures is how well you
take the Digital SAT. It does not reveal how smart—or how good—a person
you are.

Who Writes the Digital SAT?
Even though colleges and universities make wide use of the SAT, they’re not
the ones who write the test. That’s the job of College Board, the organization
that creates the tests and decides how they will be administered and used.

The test-writers have been criticized for the SAT over the years. Many
educators have argued that the test does not measure the skills you really
need for college. In 2005, this led College Board to overhaul the entire test,
only to revise it all over again in early 2016. And in January 2022, College
Board announced another major change—the shift to a digital, adaptive SAT.
The important takeaway here is that the people who write the Digital SAT
have made many changes to the test over the years, so understanding the
structure of the current exam is your first step to improving on the test.
                  Wait, Who Writes This Test?
                  You may be surprised to learn that the people who
                  write Digital SAT test questions are NOT necessarily
                  teachers or college professors. The people who
                  write the Digital SAT are professional test-writers,
                  not super-human geniuses, so you can learn to think
                  as they do and beat them at their own game.



What’s on the Digital SAT?
The Digital SAT is 2 hours and 14 minutes long.

The test consists of the following sections, in this order:

    Reading and Writing (2 modules, each 27 questions in 32 minutes)
        All questions in the RW section are multiple-choice.
        Two questions in each module are experimental and are not scored.
    A 10-minute break
    Math (2 modules, each 22 questions in 35 minutes)
        Most questions in the Math section are multiple-choice.
        The rest are “student-produced responses” (fill-ins).
        Two questions in each module are experimental and are not scored.

                  Key Takeaway
                  Knowing how the test is structured will help you
                  determine what you need to do to crack it!


The Math section contains some student-produced-response questions, but all
other questions on the exam are multiple-choice. All multiple-choice
questions on the Digital SAT have four possible answer choices.

The remaining chapters of this book cover these sections in detail, but here’s
a brief rundown of what you can expect.

Reading and Writing Section
Previous versions of the SAT had Reading and Writing as separate sections,
with several questions attached to each long passage. The Digital SAT
combines Reading and Writing. The Reading and Writing (RW) section is 64
minutes long and consists of 2 modules, each with 27 questions that are
passage-based and multiple-choice. Each short passage (which College
Board calls a “text”) or pair of passages (texts) is associated with just one
question, and texts may be paired with informational graphics. Some of the
selected texts will be from previously published works in the areas of world
literature or poetry, but most will be short passages written by College
Board and covering topics in history, social studies, and science.

The RW section consists of four parts in order:

  1. Craft and Structure (≈28%)
  2. Information and Ideas (≈26%)
  3. Standard English Conventions (≈26%)
  4. Expression of Ideas (≈20%)

The questions in each content area will be arranged by type and, in most
cases, in order of difficulty. The first two parts of each module will cover
what was previously in the Reading section of the SAT, with questions that
require you to justify your selected answer with evidence from the text
and/or graph provided. (This section is not about coming up with anything;
it’s about finding the correct answer based on the text.) In the third and fourth
parts of each module, there will be questions focused on Writing skills.
Instead of asking you to analyze a text, questions will require you to do things
like choose answers with correct punctuation and grammar. Part II of this
book will cover each question type in the Reading and Writing section.
                 Want More?
                 For even more practice, check out SAT Level Up:
                 Verbal and SAT Level Up: Math.


Math Section
You will have a total of 70 minutes to complete the Math section, which, as
mentioned earlier, is divided into two modules (each with 22 questions in 35
minutes). Most questions are multiple-choice, but there are also a handful of
what College Board calls student-produced response questions, which we
call fill-ins. For fill-in questions, instead of choosing from four answer
choices, you’ll have to work through a question and then enter your answer
on the screen by typing in the appropriate numbers. We’ll discuss this in
more detail in Chapter 26. Approximately 11 of the 44 math questions will
be fill-ins.

The Math section covers four main content areas, but not in this order:

 1. Algebra (≈35%)
 2. Advanced Math (≈35%)
 3. Problem-Solving and Data Analysis (≈15%)
 4. Geometry and Trigonometry (≈15%)

In contrast to the set order of the Reading and Writing topics, each Math
module will have questions in each of these content areas scattered
throughout but arranged in order of difficulty from the start of the module to
the end. Part III of this book covers each of these content areas in depth.

The Digital SAT has a built-in Desmos calculator that can be used on all
Math questions. In addition, students may bring their own approved
calculators if they prefer. A calculator will be a game-changer on some
questions and completely useless on others, so think about how to use it (or
not) as you work through Part III. Practice with the calculator you plan to use
on the actual test so you can take full advantage of this tool.

                 Is My Calculator Allowed?
                 Not all calculators are permitted by College Board
                 for use on the SAT. To see the full College Board
                 calculator policy, visit
                 satsuite.collegeboard.org/digital/what-to-bring-
                 do/calculator-policy


There is one more thing to know about the make-up of the Digital SAT: test-
takers do not get the exact same test. In the days of paper-and-pencil SAT
tests, the practice of giving students all over the globe the same test form led
to issues with test security and possible cheating. With the switch to the
Digital SAT, College Board says the testing app will now “assemble” a test
for each student that is “unique.” So, while all students will see the same
concepts, they won’t all see the same questions to test those concepts.

Scoring on the Digital SAT
Scores from the Digital SAT will be reported in a matter of days, not weeks
as was the case with the paper-and-pencil test. Your score report for the
Digital SAT will feature scores for each of the following:

    Total Score:
    The sum of the two section scores (Reading and Writing, Math), ranging
    from 400 to 1600

    Section Scores:
     1. Reading and Writing, ranging from 200 to 800
     2. Math, also ranging from 200 to 800

As previously mentioned, there will be two questions in each module that are
experimental. College Board uses these to see how students answer them, but
they will not count toward your score. Unfortunately, they are not marked in
any way, so make sure to treat all questions as if they will be scored.

On the recent paper-and-pencil versions of the SAT, various subscores and
cross-test scores were reported in addition to the section and overall scores.
On the Digital SAT, only the scores listed above will be reported. This
means that you will not be given any information on how you scored within
specific subject areas.




                 Unlock Premium Content!
                 Enhance your test prep with your Premium online
                 resources, like helpful week-by-week study guides.
                 Plus, use the “SAT Insider” to help navigate college
                 admissions, applications, financial aid, and more.


So how do the two modules work together to determine your score in a
section? Well, how you score on the first module determines whether you get
an Easier or Harder second module. If you are given the Easier second
module, you’ll find that more of the questions are within your ability to get
right, but there will be an upper limit to your score. If you get the Harder
second module, you’ll have the chance to score higher, but the questions in
the module will be more difficult to get right. Of course, if you get enough
questions correct in the first module to get the Harder second module, it’s
likely that the harder questions will be better suited to your abilities.
Some questions within a module are also weighted, so doing better on those
will increase your score more than doing well on easier, non-weighted
questions. As such, your score is determined not only by how many questions
you got right but also by how hard those questions were. Although the scoring
curve on each Digital SAT may calculate your score slightly differently, you
will always have two jobs: understanding which questions can maximize
your score and building your stamina to stay sharp through both modules in
each section. Throughout this book, we will show you how to do just that.

The following table summarizes the structure and scoring of the Digital SAT.

Category      Digital SAT
Time          134 minutes plus 10-minute break
Overall
Components         Reading and Writing section
                   Math section
Number of          Reading and Writing: 54, including 4 experimental
Questions          questions
                   Math: 44, including 4 experimental questions
Answer             Reading and Writing: all multiple-choice with 4 answers
Choices            per question
                   Math: 75% multiple-choice with 4 answers per question,
                   25% student-produced responses
Time by             Reading and Writing: 64 minutes in two 32-minute
Section             modules
                    Math: 70 minutes in two 35-minute modules
Relationship        Module 1 has a broad mix of levels of difficulty.
Between             Performance on Module 1 determines the difficulty of
Modules             Module 2.
                    Students who do well on Module 1 will get a Module 2
                    that is harder, on average.
                    Students who do less well on Module 1 will get a
                    Module 2 that is easier, on average.
Scoring             The score is based on the number of questions correct
                    and the difficulty of those questions.
                    There is no penalty for wrong answers or leaving
                    questions blank, so it’s in your best interest to guess
                    rather than leave a question blank.
                    Students who do well on Module 1 are put into a higher
                    bracket of possible scores.
                    Students who do less well on Module 1 are put into a
                    lower bracket of possible scores.
                    Section scores range from 200 to 800.
                    Total score is the sum of the section scores and ranges
                    from 400 to 1600.

How Is the Digital SAT Given?
The SAT may be digital, but it is not an online test. You will not be able to
take it in the comfort of your own home. It will still be administered at testing
centers or schools with testing capabilities. It must be taken on a computer or
laptop that has the College Board Bluebook app, which can be downloaded
at bluebook.app.collegeboard.org/.

If you do not have your own device, and your school cannot provide one for
you, you can request to borrow one from College Board when you register.
However, although College Board says that this process will run smoothly
for students, we have our doubts. It is best to ensure that you have access to a
device without relying on College Board, so borrow one from a friend or
family member if you must.

Once at the testing center, you will be given a code to access your test in the
testing app. The app only needs access to the Internet for a brief period while
assembling your test, then you can proceed despite any interruptions in
internet connectivity or device power. College Board says that even if your
battery dies, your test progress will be saved and no time will be lost, but it
is a good idea to have a device that can hold a charge for at least 3 hours.


        Device Requirements
        Here are College Board’s device guidelines:

        Students can test on Bluebook using Windows laptops or
        tablets, Mac laptops, iPads, or school-managed
        Chromebooks. The device must be able to connect to Wi-Fi.

        Windows laptops/tablets
           running Windows 10 or later
           have at least 250 MB of free space available

        Mac laptops
           running macOS 11.4 or later
           have at least 150 MB of free space available

        iPads
            running iPadOS 13.4 or later
            have at least 150 MB of free space available

        School-managed Chromebooks
           running Chrome OS 83 or later
            have at least 150 MB of free space available

        (Note: if your device is running Chrome OS 99, the operating
        system will need to be updated. You cannot run Bluebook on
        a personal Chromebook.)



When Is the Digital SAT Given?
The first administration of the Digital SAT was in March 2023 for students
outside the United States. The PSAT will go digital in the fall of 2023 for all
students worldwide. Students in the United States will take the Digital SAT
for the first time in March 2024. The full Digital SAT schedule for the school
year      is     posted    on     the    College     Board       website     at
bluebook.app.collegeboard.org/.

The best way to sign up for one of these Digital SAT administrations is by
going to www.collegeboard.org and clicking on the link for the test date you
want. Try to sign up for the Digital SAT as soon as you know when you want
to take the test. If you wait until the last minute to sign up, there may not be
any open spots in the testing centers.

Although you may take the Digital SAT any time in your high school career,
most students take it for the first time in the spring of their junior year and
may retake it in the fall of their senior year. However, the best approach for
students is to find a window of about 2–4 months when they have enough
time to fully prep leading up to a test administration, while still allowing
them to retake it if necessary. In fact, you may have more time to take it
between sophomore and junior year or in the fall of junior year.
                 Stay on Schedule
                 Find a window of about 2–4 months to fully prep for
                 the Digital SAT. Determine which test administration
                 you are aiming for and leave time to retake the test if
                 necessary. Then sit down and plan a prep schedule
                 that will work for you.


If you require any special accommodation while taking the test (including,
but not limited to, extra time or assistance), bluebook.app.collegeboard.org/
has information about applying for those accommodations. Make sure to
apply early; we recommend applying six months before you plan to take the
test.

Your school may also offer a Digital SAT option during the school day.
Schools will have the option to offer the test to students over a testing
window of several days. If this is an option at your school, the school will
register you for the test, but the results can still be used in the college
application process.


HOW TO BEGIN
After this chapter, you will find Practice Test 1 and its answers and
explanations. This will act as your “diagnostic” test. We recommend that you
take this test before going any further in order to realistically determine the
following:

    your approximate starting score
    which question types you’re ready for and which you might need to
    practice
    which content topics you are familiar with and which you will want to
    carefully review

Once you have nailed down your strengths and weaknesses based on this
exam, you can focus your test preparation, build a study plan, and be efficient
with your time. Use the following steps to make the most of this first
“diagnostic” test.

   1. Take a practice test. To “diagnose” your strengths and weaknesses,
      take Practice Test 1 starting on this page of this book or take it online in
      your Student Tools. Be sure to do so in one sitting, following the
      instructions that appear with each section of the test.

   2. Score your test online. Once you register your book, you can take tests
      online in the testing app or enter the answers to your practice tests in
      your online tools. When you do so, you will get a score report that
      details your performance on a variety of question types. You will also
      get an approximate score, though the scale for the Digital SAT will
      change a bit from test to test.

   3. Take stock and make a plan. With the insights you’ll gain from your
      score report, decide where to start with the content of this book. You
      may choose to use some parts of this book over others, or you may
      work through the entire book. The ways in which you use this book will
      depend on your needs and how much time you have. Now let’s look at
      how to make this determination.

When you enter your practice test answers online, you will get a score report
that starts with your Total score, followed by a breakdown of the scores for
each section of the test. Below that will be a breakdown of the questions by
test section, with a tab for each one. Each question will be represented by a
box with a mark to indicate if it was Correct, Incorrect, or Blank. Clicking on
the box for a question brings up the explanation for it, which is also found in
this book. Additionally, you can see the question category listed as “Concept
Tested.”
                 Scoring Your Practice Tests
                 Taking your tests online has the added benefit of
                 giving you an immediate estimated score. If you take
                 Test 1 in the book, you can use a bubble sheet to
                 enter the answers then enter your answer online to
                 get that score. Always check the Student Tools to
                 learn the latest information about scoring for the
                 Digital SAT.


To see a section breakdown by concept, you can click the “View by
Category” button. Use this view to determine the following:

    question types you are good at, to make sure you can find and correctly
    answer questions in these categories every time
    question types that have several questions in them but that you struggled
    with a bit, so you can work to improve your accuracy on these important
    questions
    question types that were either very difficult for you or had only one or
    two questions in them. Practice these question types only after you’ve
    mastered the others.

After you determine these things for Reading and Writing, you can do the
same for Math by clicking on the Math tab of the score report.

Your analysis of your performance on Practice Test 1 will affect how you
engage with Part II (How to Crack the Reading and Writing Section) and
Part III (How to Crack the Math Section). Each of these parts is designed to
give a comprehensive review of the content tested on the Digital SAT,
including the level of detail you need to know and how the content is tested.
At the end of each of these chapters, you’ll have the opportunity to assess
your understanding of the content covered through targeted drills that reflect
the types of questions and level of difficulty you’ll see on the actual exam.
Answers and explanations can be found at the end of each chapter, so use
those explanations to continue assessing your skills.
After you have mastered a few key concepts and strategies, take another
practice test in your Student Tools and analyze it the same way to see where
you’ve improved and where you have more work to do. Continue alternating
working through the chapters of this book and taking practice tests until you
feel fully prepared to conquer the Digital SAT.

One important note: In this book, the sample questions are in numerical
order within a chapter. The question number does not indicate where you can
expect to see a similar question on the test. As we’ll show you later, what
really matters is your personal order of difficulty.


A FINAL THOUGHT BEFORE YOU BEGIN
The Digital SAT does not measure intelligence, nor does it predict your
ultimate success or failure as a human being. No matter how high or how low
you score on this test initially, and no matter how much you may increase
your score through preparation, you should never consider the score you
receive on this or any other test a final judgment of your abilities.
Chapter 2
Practice Test 1
Click here to download a PDF of Practice Test 1 with bubble sheet.
The Digital SAT will be administered on a computer or tablet, so it is best if
you take your practice tests in the online Student Tools for this book.
However, if you are unable to test on a computer or if you have
accommodations and will take the official test on paper, you may take Test 1
on paper in this book instead. Both sets of instructions are below.

To Test Online:

Register your book according to the instructions on this page. In your Student
Tools, you will be able to access the tests associated with this book: both the
one printed in this book and the additional online-only tests.

The Digital SAT has only two modules in each section, not three like the test
printed in this book. The second module you get in each section will be
determined by your performance on the first module in that section. The
online tests follow this structure, and once you finish the test, you will get an
estimated score based on the modules you saw and the questions you got
right.

To Test on Paper:

For both RW and Math, the following test contains a standard first module
and two options for the second module, one easier and one harder. You
should take the appropriate second module based on your performance in the
first module, as detailed below, but you can feel free to use the other module
for extra practice later.

In order to navigate the practice test in this book, take the following steps. To
record your answers, you can either indicate them as described in the
directions for print tests included with each module or by entering them onto
the answer sheet on this page.

   ☐ Take Reading and Writing (RW) Module 1, allowing yourself 32
     minutes to complete it.
☐ Go to the answer key starting on this page and determine the number of
  questions you got correct in RW Module 1.
☐ If you get fewer than 15 questions correct, take RW Module 2 – Easier,
  which starts on this page. If you get 15 or more questions correct, take
  RW Module 2 – Harder, which starts on this page.
☐ Whichever RW Module 2 you take, start it immediately and allow
  yourself 32 minutes to complete it.
☐ Take a 10-minute break between RW Module 2 and Math Module 1.
☐ Take Math Module 1, allowing yourself 35 minutes to complete it.
☐ Go to the answer key starting on this page and determine the number of
  questions you got correct in Math Module 1.
☐ If you get fewer than 14 questions correct, take Math Module 2 –
  Easier, which starts on this page. If you get 14 or more questions
  correct, take Math Module 2 – Harder, which starts on this page.
☐ Whichever Math Module you take, start it immediately and allow
  yourself 35 minutes to complete it.
☐ After you finish the test, check your answers to RW Module 2 and Math
  Module 2.
☐ Only after you complete the entire test should you read the explanations
  for the questions, which start on this page and are also available online.
☐ Go to your online student tools to see the latest information about
  scoring and to get your estimated score.
                               Section 1, Module 1: Reading and Writing

     SAT Prep Test 1—Reading and Writing
                                     Module 1
Turn to Section 1 of your answer sheet to answer the questions in this section.


      DIRECTIONS

     The questions in this section address a number of important reading and
     writing skills. Each question includes one or more passages, which may
     include a table or graph. Read each passage and question carefully, and then
     choose the best answer to the question based on the passage(s).

     All questions in the section are multiple-choice with four answer choices. Each
     question has a single best answer.



1.      Mark for Review
     The Chilean volcano Calabozos is located in __________ area.
     Therefore, the risk of loss of human life in the event of an eruption is
     minimal.

     Which choice completes the text with the most logical and precise
     word or phrase?

        A a hazardous

        B an active

        C a mountainous

        D a remote


2.      Mark for Review
     Contemporaries of American modernist poet H.D. focused only on her
     important contributions to the Imagist movement in the 1920s, taking
     __________ view of her work. However, she wrote in a variety of
     forms and genres, from short, lyrical works to complex, book-length
     poems.

     Which choice completes the text with the most logical and precise
     word or phrase?

       A an expansive

       B a limited

       C an imaginative

       D a complicated


3.      Mark for Review
     Since the 1950s, scientists have known that rapid eye movement, or
     REM, occurs when someone is sleeping. Previous studies attempting to
     determine the meaning of these eye movements have been unsuccessful
     in part because these studies relied on human subjects recalling the
     content of their dreams. A recent study by physiologists Yuta Senzai
     and Massimo Scanziani has avoided this issue by studying dreaming
     mice instead. Their results suggest that REM is correlated to changes in
     direction during the dream.

     Which choice best describes the function of the second sentence in the
     overall structure of the text?

       A It names a problem in the approach taken by Senzai and
          Scanziani.
       B It introduces the difficulty that the study by Senzai and
          Scanziani was designed to bypass.

       C It presents the findings of studies done prior to the study by
          Senzai and Scanziani.

       D It clarifies how others studying REM sleep interpret the
          study by Senzai and Scanziani.


4.      Mark for Review
     Electroreception is the ability of an animal to sense the flow of
     electricity around it by using specialized organs known as
     electroreceptors. Most species known to use electroreception are fish,
     including many sharks, elephant fishes, and eels. However,
     electroreception is not limited to fish. Monotremes, a group of
     mammals that includes the platypus and some echidnas, have
     electroreceptors on or near their mouths to help locate prey. There is
     also some evidence that bees can detect static electricity on flowers.

     Which choice best describes the function of the third sentence in the
     overall structure of the text?

       A It generalizes the phenomenon discussed beyond fishes.

       B It offers another explanation of electroreception that is
          different from the explanation of how electroreception is
          used by fishes.

       C It provides more examples of animals with electroreception.

       D It explains how electroreception evolved in monotremes
          and bees.
5.      Mark for Review
     Text 1
     An animal is said to have a theory of mind when it is able to act
     according to the mental states of other individuals. Psychologists David
     Premack and Guy Woodruff studied whether chimpanzees have such a
     theory of mind. They showed videos of human actors struggling with
     various problems. The chimpanzees were able to select photographs
     that showed the best tool to solve each actor’s problem.

     Text 2
     Biologist Daniel J. Povinelli and psychologists Kurt E. Nelson and
     Sarah T. Boysen have argued that previous research into whether
     chimpanzees have a theory of mind have not adequately addressed
     alternative explanations for the chimpanzees’ behaviors. Specifically, it
     may be the case that chimpanzees are following learned behaviors in a
     known environment, rather than applying a theory of mind in a novel
     situation.

     Based on the texts, how would Povinelli, Nelson, and Boysen (Text 2)
     most likely respond to Premack and Woodruff (Text 1)?

       A They would argue that nonhuman primates other than
         chimpanzees, such as baboons and gorillas, may also have
         a theory of mind.

       B They would argue that the chimpanzees would be able to
         solve the problems themselves without referencing the
         photographs by struggling with the situation themselves and
         eventually determining the correct solution.

       C They would encourage Premack and Woodruff to show the
         same videos and photographs to other nonhuman primates
           and compare the other nonhuman primates’ reactions to the
           chimpanzees’ reactions.

       D They would suggest that placing the chimpanzee subjects in
         novel environments, such as rooms distinct from the
         chimpanzees’ regular enclosures, may help better ascertain
         whether chimpanzees have a theory of mind.


6.      Mark for Review
     The following text is from Oscar Wilde’s 1890 novel The Picture of
     Dorian Gray. Dorian is seeing his portrait, painted by Basil Hallward,
     for the first time.

     Dorian made no answer, but passed listlessly in front of his
     picture and turned towards it. When he saw it he drew back, and
     his cheeks flushed for a moment with pleasure. A look of joy
     came into his eyes, as if he had recognized himself for the first
     time. He stood there motionless and in wonder, dimly conscious
     that Hallward was speaking to him, but not catching the meaning
     of his words. The sense of his own beauty came on him like a
     revelation. He had never felt it before.

     According to the text, what is true about Dorian?

       A Dorian is distracted by the beauty of the painting.

       B Dorian believes that what Hallward is saying is
         unimportant.

       C Dorian does not recognize his own image.

       D Dorian is prone to embarrassment.
7.      Mark for Review
     The following text is from Frederick Marryat’s 1847 novel The
     Children of the New Forest.

     The old forester lay awake the whole of this night, reflecting
     how he should act relative to the children; he felt the great
     responsibility that he had incurred, and was alarmed when he
     considered what might be the consequences if his days were
     shortened. What would become of them—living in so
     sequestered a spot that few knew even of its existence—totally
     shut out from the world, and left to their own resources?

     Based on the text, what is true about the children?

        A They are isolated from people other than the old forester.

        B They are completely unable to take care of themselves.

        C The old forester is resentful of having to take care of them.

        D They attempt to help the old forester with his
          responsibilities.


8.      Mark for Review
     The following text is Baron George Gordon Byron’s poem “Answer to
     _______’s Professions of Affection,” written around 1814. The poem
     is addressed to an unknown person.

     In hearts like thine ne’er may I hold a place
     Till I renounce all sense, all shame, all grace—
     That seat,—like seats, the bane of Freedom’s realm,
     But dear to those presiding at the helm—
     Is basely purchased, not with gold alone;
     Add Conscience, too, this bargain is your own—
     ‘Tis thine to offer with corrupting art
     The rotten borough of the human heart.

     What is the main idea of the text?

       A The speaker is expressing disapproval towards the
         unknown person.

       B The speaker is unimportant to the unknown person.

       C The speaker is thinking of purchasing a seat.

       D The speaker holds a place in the heart of the unknown
         person.


9.      Mark for Review
     Sepsis is a life-threatening condition caused by the body’s response to
     an infection. These infections are typically bacterial but may be fungal,
     parasitic, or viral. The body’s response to these infections leads to
     increased inflammation and organ damage. This damage, in turn, results
     in a weakened immune system, which increases the likelihood of
     reinfection. In a recent study, a team of doctors and pharmacologists led
     by Shubham Soni claims that administering ketone esters can reduce
     inflammation and immune system weakening caused by sepsis.

     Which finding from the team led by Soni, if true, would most directly
     support its claim?

       A Patients with sepsis who were administered ketone esters
         had fewer signs of inflammation and less organ damage
         than those administered standard antibiotics.
        B When administered, ketone esters are known to increase
          blood ketone levels, which in turn are a source of energy
          for the brain.

        C Both those patients administered ketone esters and those
          administered standard antibiotics did not have reduced
          inflammation when treated with medication intended to
          reduce fever.

        D Those sepsis patients administered ketone esters had
          reduced inflammation but greater organ damage than those
          administered standard antibiotics.


  Horses’ Responses to Novel Objects Based on Number of Handlers

                             Only One Handler           Multiple Handlers
          No reluctance             45%                        25%
        Mild reluctance             42%                        49%
       Strong reluctance            13%                        26%



10.      Mark for Review
      Horses have been domesticated for thousands of years. Therefore, they
      show great sensitivity to the emotions of humans. Biologist Océane
      Liehrmann from the University of Turku, Finland, led a team of
      researchers in a study of horses to determine the effect of the number of
      handlers (either only one person or multiple people) on the horses’
      responses to a novel object. The researchers determined that horses
      with only one handler were less reluctant to interact with the novel
      object than were horses with multiple handlers. For example, 45% of
      horses with only one handler had no reluctance when interacting with a
      novel object while __________.

      Which choice most effectively uses data from the table to complete the
      example?

        A 13% of horses with only one handler had strong reluctance.

        B 25% of horses with multiple handlers had no reluctance.

        C 26% of horses with multiple handlers had strong reluctance.

        D 42% of horses with only one handler had mild reluctance.


      Indian Lok Sabha Results by Percentage of Seats Won, 1999–2019

                  Party                    1999 2004 2009 2014 2019
Bharatiya Janata Party                     33% 25% 21% 52% 56%
Indian National Congress                   21% 27% 38%           8%     10%
Communist Party of India (Marxist)          6%     8%     4%     7%     4%
Other                                      40% 40% 37% 33% 30%



11.      Mark for Review
      India is the largest democracy in the world, with over 614 million
      people voting in the 2019 election for the Lok Sabha, the parliament of
      the federal government. In the early years of Indian independence, from
      the first election in 1951–52 through the eighth Lok Sabha in 1984, each
      election resulted in one party winning the majority of seats. However,
      starting with the 1989 election, the party with the largest number of
      seats failed to win more than half of the total seats. This trend was
      eventually broken by the Bharatiya Janata Party, which __________.
     Which choice most effectively uses data from the graph to illustrate the
     claim?

        A went from holding the second most seats among the top 3
          parties in parliament in 2004 and 2009 to holding a
          majority of seats in 2014 and 2019.

        B reached its highest percentage of seats the same year that the
           Indian National Congress had its lowest percentage of seats
           over the same time period.

        C won a lower percentage of seats in the 2009 election than in
          the 2004 election.

        D had a lower percentage of seats than the Indian National
           Congress in 2004 but a higher percentage of seats than the
           Indian National Congress in 1999.


 Changes in Indicators of Fatty Liver Disease in Vitamin B12 and Placebo
                                  Groups

              Indicator                   Vitamin B12       Control Group
                                             Group
steatosis values (dB/cm/MHz)                 –0.41               –0.30
fibrosis values (kPa)                        –0.35               0.10
fasting blood glucose (mg/dl)                –5.00               –1.50
fasting serum insulin (µU/ml)                –1.46               –0.21
homeostasis model assessment of              –0.23               0.06
insulin resistance (HOMA-IR)
12.      Mark for Review
      Fatty liver disease (FLD) occurs when excess fat builds up in the liver.
      While there are often few or no symptoms of FLD, if left untreated, it
      can lead to cirrhosis or liver cancer. Because FLD is often
      asymptomatic, doctors and researchers rely on indicators such as
      steatosis (retention of fat in the liver), fibrosis (scarring), blood
      glucose (sugar), serum insulin, and insulin resistance to measure and
      track the development of FLD. A group of researchers led by
      radiologist Hamid Reza Talari hypothesized that those who take
      vitamin B12 would experience improvements in fibrosis and insulin
      resistance when compared to a control group over the same time
      period.

      Which choice best describes data from the table that support the
      researchers’ hypothesis?

        A Those in the control group had decreases in their steatosis
          values and fasting blood glucose but had increases in
          fibrosis values and HOMA-IR.

        B Those in the vitamin B12 group had decreases in fibrosis
          values and HOMA-IR levels, whereas those in the control
          group had increases in these same values.

        C Both those in the vitamin B12 group and the control group
          had decreases in their steatosis values.

        D Those in the control group had a decrease in their fasting
          blood glucose, but those in the vitamin B12 group had an
          increase in their fasting blood glucose.


      Mean Levels of Carbon Monoxide (ppm), November 18–26, 1966
            City                       Day of the Month of November
                             18   19     20   21   22   23    24   25     26
Newark, NJ                   16   14     15   21   23   28    32   27     21
New York, NY                  4    3      1    2    3    6    7    13     8
Philadelphia, PA              6    0      0    0    1    6    9    10     6
Washington, D.C.              4    2      3    0    0    0    0       0   0



13.      Mark for Review
      The air pollution produced in an area is only one factor in that area’s
      air quality. Weather patterns, in particular wind and the movement of
      air masses, can affect the concentration of pollutants such as carbon
      monoxide. During a smog event that occurred in the northeastern United
      States in November 1966, levels of carbon monoxide were recorded in
      Newark, New Jersey, the origin of the smog event, as well as
      neighboring city New York, NY, and more distant cities such as
      Philadelphia, PA, and Washington, D.C. The localized nature of
      weather patterns during this event can be seen by comparing Newark,
      NJ, and New York, NY, with __________.

      Which choice most effectively uses data from the table to complete the
      statement?

        A Washington, D.C., on the 18th and the 19th.

        B Philadelphia, PA, on the 23rd and the 25th

        C Philadelphia, PA, on the 24th and the 26th.

        D Washington, D.C., on the 23rd and the 24th.
14.      Mark for Review
      Neurons respond to stimuli from sensory organs or other neurons.
      Learning occurs when neurons change how they respond to stimuli
      based on previous experience, which is a property of memory.
      Electrical engineers seek to replicate similar processes in their
      development of computer memory. Recently, research by electrical
      engineer Mohammad Samizadeh Nikoo has demonstrated that vanadium
      dioxide (VO2) has a similar memory property to that of neurons,
      suggesting that __________.

      Which choice most logically completes the text?

        A VO2 could be used in the development of computer memory.

        B neurons use VO2 when forming memories.

        C VO2 can learn to respond to stimuli from sensory organs.

        D electrical engineers can now use neurons to develop
           computer memory.


15.      Mark for Review
      Uruguayan-Spanish author Carmen Posadas has written the children’s
      books Juego de Niños (Child’s Play) and La Cinta Roja (The Red
      Ribbon). Currently, __________ available in over fifty countries and
      thirty languages.

      Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the conventions
      of Standard English?

        A some are

        B this is
        C they are

        D it is


16.      Mark for Review
      During a meeting, a group of twelve young deaf people shared their
      feelings of isolation and their desire for support. In 1988, the group
      worked together to form Action Deaf Youth, an __________ provides
      services and programs for deaf children and youth throughout Northern
      Ireland.

      Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the conventions
      of Standard English?

        A organization, that

        B organization

        C organization that

        D organization,


17.      Mark for Review
      In 1986, after a 56-day expedition, Ann Bancroft became the first
      woman to reach the North Pole. Her experience as a physical education
      teacher and her leadership of the first all-female team to cross the ice
      to the South __________ her to create a foundation that supports girls
      in pursuing their dreams.

      Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the conventions
      of Standard English?

        A Pole to inspire
        B Pole that inspired

        C Pole, inspiring

        D Pole inspired


18.      Mark for Review
      American artist Simone Leigh creates art in various mediums, including
      sculptures, video, and __________ the themes and images in her
      artwork, Leigh has emphasized that Black women are her primary
      audience and that they would be familiar with the allusions in her work.

      Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the conventions
      of Standard English?

        A performance. Discussing

        B performance discussing

        C performance and discussing

        D performance, discussing


19.      Mark for Review
      Japanese origamist Akira Yoshizawa is considered the grandmaster of
      origami, creating more than 50,000 models as well as wet-folding, the
      most well-known of his invented techniques. __________ dampening
      the paper before folding, leading to origami models with rounder and
      more sculpted looks.

      Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the conventions
      of Standard English?

        A It involves
        B They involve

        C One involves

        D These involve


20.      Mark for Review
      Chinese artist Xu Bing is known for his art installations that showcase
      his printmaking skills and his creative use of languages and texts. His
      1991 installation A Book from the Sky, for example, consists of
      volumes and scrolls printed with characters he invented, while his
      2004 installation The Glassy Surface of a __________ uses the text of
      Henry David Thoreau’s Walden to create the illusion of a lake.

      Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the conventions
      of Standard English?

        A Lake:

        B Lake

        C Lake,

        D Lake–


21.      Mark for Review
      Developed along with the swing style of jazz music in the 1920s, swing
      dance is a group of social dances that once comprised hundreds of
      styles. Not all of the styles survived beyond that time __________ the
      dances that are still popular today include Lindy Hop, Balboa,
      Collegiate Shag, and Charleston.
      Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the conventions
      of Standard English?

        A period; however,

        B period, however;

        C period, however,

        D period, however


22.      Mark for Review
      Evolutionary biologist Jonathan Calede may have discovered the oldest
      amphibious beaver species in the world. Calede first compared
      measurements of the beaver’s ankle to those of almost 350 other rodent
      species to learn more about how it moved. __________ Calede dated
      the species to approximately 30 million years ago based on its location
      between rock and ash layers.

      Which choice completes the text with the most logical transition?

        A For example,

        B In conclusion,

        C Next,

        D In fact,


23.      Mark for Review
      Male and female American citizens had starkly different roles during
      World War II. Men served as soldiers or took part in the workforce to
      create weapons and other wartime materials. __________ women
      were responsible for maintaining the home and supporting the men.
      Some women also ventured into the workforce for the first time, and the
      famous “We Can Do It” poster featuring “Rosie the Riveter” was
      created to motivate women to pursue this new role.

      Which choice completes the text with the most logical transition?

         A Besides,

         B Instead,

         C Likewise,

         D Meanwhile,


24.      Mark for Review
      While treatment for hearing loss is typically associated with the ears,
      some patients with damaged ear structures are not able to use
      traditional cochlear implants. __________ researchers are working to
      develop hearing aids anchored to patients’ bones in order to combat
      hearing loss through vibrations in the skull.

      Which choice completes the text with the most logical transition?

         A Secondly,

         B In addition,

         C Finally,

         D Hence,


25.      Mark for Review
      Korean artist Anicka Yi uses a unique process and materials to
      generate her art installations. Her materials are often perishable and
      biological, such as soap and flowers, and are not traditionally used for
      artwork. __________ Yi spends almost as much time transforming
      these substances into completely new materials as she does creating the
      actual art pieces.

      Which choice completes the text with the most logical transition?

        A Meanwhile,

        B Instead,

        C In fact,

        D To conclude,


26.      Mark for Review
      While researching a topic, a student has taken the following notes:
           A writing system for expressing numbers is a numeral system.
           Two examples of numeral systems from history are Babylonian
           cuneiform numerals and Roman numerals.
           The Babylonian cuneiform numeral system is a base-60 system
           and lacks a zero digit.
           It’s a positional numeral system in which the position of a digit
           affects its value.
           The Roman numeral system is a base-10 system and lacks a zero
           digit.
           It’s a non-positional numeral system in which the position of a
           digit does not affect its value.

      The student wants to emphasize a difference between the two numeral
      systems. Which choice most effectively uses relevant information from
      the notes to accomplish this goal?

        A Babylonian cuneiform numerals and Roman numerals are
          two writing systems for expressing numbers.

        B The Roman numeral system is a base-10 non-positional
          system that lacks a zero digit.

        C One system for expressing numbers is Babylonian
          cuneiform; however, another one is the Roman numeral
          system.

        D The Babylonian cuneiform numeral system is base-60 and
          positional, while the Roman numeral system is base-10 and
          non-positional.


27.      Mark for Review
      While researching a topic, a student has taken the following notes:
           Archaeologists studied the burial of an individual at the Newen
           Antug site in Argentinian Patagonia.
           The individual was buried in a wooden structure over 800 years
           ago.
           An analysis of the structure revealed that it was carved from a tree
           with excellent buoyancy.
           The wooden structure was a canoe, suggesting that canoes were
           used as coffins at that time.

      The student wants to present the Newen Antug study and its
      conclusions. Which choice most effectively uses relevant information
      from the notes to accomplish this goal?
A The burial site of an individual over 800 years ago was
  found at the Newen Antug site in Argentinian Patagonia.

B Archaeologists studied the burial site of an individual who
  was buried at the Newen Antug site over 800 years ago.

C An analysis of a burial site at the Newen Antug site in
  Argentinian Patagonia provided evidence that canoes were
  used as coffins over 800 years ago.

D As part of a study of a burial site at the Newen Antug site in
  Argentinian Patagonia, a wooden structure buried with an
  individual was analyzed.
                   Section 1, Module 2—Easier: Reading and Writing

     SAT Prep Test 1—Reading and Writing
                             Module 2—Easier
Turn to Section 1 of your answer sheet to answer the questions in this section.


      DIRECTIONS

     The questions in this section address a number of important reading and
     writing skills. Each question includes one or more passages, which may
     include a table or graph. Read each passage and question carefully, and then
     choose the best answer to the question based on the passage(s).

     All questions in the section are multiple-choice with four answer choices. Each
     question has a single best answer.



1.      Mark for Review
     Shakespeare intentionally provided no stage directions for his play
     Macbeth regarding whether to have Banquo’s ghost physically present
     on stage or simply to have Macbeth react fearfully to something
     invisible, thus providing future directors with the __________ to
     indulge their own artistic interpretations.

     Which choice completes the text with the most logical and precise
     word or phrase?

       A confusion

       B dedication

       C instruction

       D liberty
2.      Mark for Review
     German-Dutch paleontologist Ralph von Koenigswald was the first to
     discover the fossilized remains of Gigantopithecus blacki, a
     gargantuan ape believed to have lived during the Pleistocene Epoch.
     Because the fossils were exclusively found in caves in southern China,
     many experts believe that the species was __________ that region—
     that is, anyone claiming to have found remains of Gigantopithecus
     elsewhere would be mistaken.

     Which choice completes the text with the most logical and precise
     word or phrase?

       A restricted to

       B eliminated from

       C common in

       D unknown to


3.      Mark for Review
     Computer scientist Ray Kurzweil __________ that although artificial
     intelligence will not displace human beings, it will undoubtedly
     become smarter than people within this generation. This possibility has
     been the domain of science fiction writers for decades, whose works
     explore the ramifications of just such a future.

     Which choice completes the text with the most logical and precise
     word or phrase?

       A proves

       B requires
        C predicts

        D denies


4.      Mark for Review
     In psychology, it’s critical not to generalize from the results of studies
     in which the subjects are not representative of the larger population.
     The infamous Stanford Prison Experiment __________ this principle:
     the participants, whose behavior supposedly demonstrated the “human”
     tendency towards alarming aggression in authoritarian situations, were
     a handful of male college-age individuals from the same private
     university in California rather than a diverse sampling of subjects.

     Which choice completes the text with the most logical and precise
     word or phrase?

        A illustrates

        B refutes

        C supersedes

        D critiques


5.      Mark for Review
     Neurologists know that prosopagnosia—the __________ to recognize
     faces—involves a specific lesion in the brain and can be caused by
     disease or head injury. However, prominent author Dr. Oliver Sacks
     believes that this “face blindness” also has a definite genetic
     component.

     Which choice completes the text with the most logical and precise
     word or phrase?
       A capability

       B incapacity

       C tendency

       D reluctance


6.      Mark for Review
     The shark’s competitive advantage in the oceanic ecosystem is
     principally due to electroreception, or ability to detect electrical
     impulses. Marine biologists believe that this heightened __________ to
     electrical stimuli allows the shark to easily find its prey, for as fish
     swim through water, their movement produces minute electrical signals.

     Which choice completes the text with the most logical and precise
     word or phrase?

       A allergy

       B sensitivity

       C indifference

       D aversion


7.      Mark for Review
     The Voynich manuscript was written on vellum dating from the fifteenth
     century in a script that is not found in any other source. Since
     cryptographers have yet to demonstrably decipher any portion of the
     text, the meaning and purpose of the Voynich manuscript remain
     __________ .
     Which choice completes the text with the most logical and precise
     word or phrase?

       A enigmatic

       B venerable

       C multifarious

       D coherent


8.      Mark for Review
     It is commonly believed that, in the complex ecosystem of the Nile
     River in Africa, the crocodile and the Egyptian plover bird have
     formed an __________ relationship: the crocodile opens its mouth and
     keeps it open while the bird instinctively eats the food particles
     remaining in the crocodile’s teeth, thus nourishing the bird while
     simultaneously promoting the crocodile’s dental health.

     Which choice completes the text with the most logical and precise
     word or phrase?

       A interdependent

       B inexplicable

       C enthralling

       D inarticulate


9.      Mark for Review
     The following text is from Herman Melville’s 1924 short novel Billy
     Budd and pertains to Edward Vere, the captain of the ship on which
     Billy is sailing.
      Captain the Honorable Edward Fairfax Vere, to give his full
      title, was a bachelor of forty or thereabouts, a sailor of
      distinction even in a time prolific of renowned seamen. Though
      allied to the higher nobility, his advancement had not been
      altogether owing to influences connected with that circumstance.
      He had seen much service, been in various engagements, always
      acquitting himself as an officer mindful of the welfare of his
      men, but never tolerating an infraction of discipline; thoroughly
      versed in the science of his profession, and intrepid to the verge
      of temerity, though never injudiciously so.

      According to the text, what is true of Captain Vere?

        A He dislikes many of the men who serve under him.

        B He is proud of his aristocratic background.

        C He is a capable and evenhanded naval officer.

        D He prefers navy life to life outside the navy.


10.      Mark for Review
      I Remember, I Remember is an 1844 poem by Thomas Hood. The poem
      conveys the speaker’s sadness that his life as an adult does not compare
      favorably to his childhood: __________.

      Which quotation from the poem most effectively illustrates the claim?

        A “The lilacs where the robin built, / And where my brother
           set / The laburnum on his birthday,— / The tree is living
           yet!”

        B “I remember, I remember, / The house where I was born, /
           The little window where the sun / Came peeping in at
            morn.”

        C “I remember, I remember, / The roses, red and white, / The
           vi’lets, and the lily-cups, / Those flowers made of light!”

        D “It was a childish ignorance,/ But now ‘tis little joy / To
           know I’m farther off from heav’n / Than when I was a boy.”


11.      Mark for Review
      Dracula is an 1897 novel by Bram Stoker. In the story, English lawyer
      Jonathan Harker has traveled to Transylvania to conduct business with
      Count Dracula at his castle. In his journal, Harker conveys his belief
      that he has become Dracula’s prisoner: __________.

      Which quotation from Jonathan Harker’s journal most effectively
      illustrates the claim?

        A “What manner of man is this, or what manner of creature, is
           it in the semblance of man? I feel the dread of this horrible
           place overpowering me.”

        B “My lamp seemed to be of little effect in the brilliant
           moonlight, but I was glad to have it with me, for there was
           a dread loneliness in the place which chilled my heart and
           made my nerves tremble.”

        C “I start at my own shadow, and am full of all sorts of
           horrible imaginings. God knows that there is ground for my
           terrible fear in this accursed place!”

        D “I rushed up and down the stairs, trying every door and
           peering out of every window I could find, but after a little
           the conviction of my helplessness overpowered all other
           feelings.”
12.      Mark for Review
      “In Flanders Fields” is a 1915 poem written by Lieutenant-Colonel
      John McCrae, a Canadian military officer who died three years later in
      World War I. The poem is meant to be a plea towards others to join the
      war effort, as is evident by the following lines: __________.

      Which quotation from “In Flanders Fields” most effectively illustrates
      the claim?

        A “Loved and were loved and now we lie / In Flanders
           fields”

        B “In Flanders fields the poppies blow / Between the crosses
           row on row”

        C “To you from failing hands we throw / The torch; be yours
           to hold it high”

        D “We are the dead. Short days ago / We lived, felt dawn, saw
           sunset glow”


13.      Mark for Review
      The curator of a museum claims that a dress in his possession was
      worn by the wife of one of Lincoln’s generals at the presidential
      inauguration in 1865. Radiocarbon dating, which dates organic material
      with an error range of about thirty years in either direction, was
      performed on the sleeves of the dress, revealing that they date back to
      the 1975–2005 period. If both the curator’s claim and the radiocarbon
      dating analysis are correct, that would suggest that __________ .

      Which choice most logically completes the text?

        A the dress was made sometime between 1835 and 1895 and
           then damaged sometime after 1975.
        B vintage dresses are more commonly recovered from the late
           twentieth and early twenty-first centuries than from the
           mid-nineteenth century.

        C over one hundred years after the dress was made, its
           sleeves were replaced.

        D the dress was made from material different from that used
           for most dresses in the nineteenth century.


14.      Mark for Review
      In the early 1900s, paleontologists largely believed that there were no
      undocumented prehistoric aquatic species that had survived to the
      present day because it would be impossible for such a species to have
      enough animals to sustain a breeding population while escaping
      detection in the modern era. However, a coelacanth, a large lobe-finned
      fish universally believed by scientists to have gone extinct sixty-six
      million years ago, was found off the coast of South Africa as recently
      as 1938. This event may suggest that __________ .

      Which choice most logically completes the text?

        A fewer coelacanths are required to sustain a breeding
           population than was previously thought.

        B it is possible for a prehistoric species to go undiscovered
           for longer than expected.

        C the scientists who determined that the coelacanth was
           extinct ignored critical evidence.

        D the same environmental conditions that eliminated the
           dinosaurs nearly killed off the coelacanths.
15.      Mark for Review
      The door-in-the-face technique involves initially making an outrageous
      or unappealing request or offer, which the other person is highly likely
      to refuse, then following up with a more reasonable one. The subject is
      more likely to look favorably upon this second request or offer because
      it seems acceptable compared to the initial proposition. So, if an
      employee wants the best raise in annual salary from her boss that she
      can get, she might succeed by asking for a __________.

      Which choice most logically completes the text?

        A 50% raise, then asking for a 5% raise.

        B 3% raise, then asking for a 2% raise.

        C 10% raise, then asking for a 50% raise.

        D 3% raise, then asking for a 3% raise again.


16.      Mark for Review
      The North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) was an
      agreement among the United States, Canada, and Mexico that was in
      effect between 1994 and 2020. During this time, the number of
      manufacturing jobs in the United States and Canada declined, but the
      total number of manufacturing jobs in the countries covered by NAFTA
      increased. This suggests that, between 1994 and 2020, __________.

      Which choice most logically completes the text?

        A the number of manufacturing jobs in Mexico increased by a
           greater amount than the combined decreases in the United
           States and Canada.
        B NAFTA made it more difficult for manufacturers to
          establish factories in the United States and Canada.

        C the cost of manufacturing goods in the area covered by
           NAFTA decreased.

        D complex goods, such as automobiles and electronics, were
           increasingly manufactured in the United States, Canada, and
           Mexico.


17.      Mark for Review
      American chef Alice Waters is well-known for opening the restaurant
      Chez Panisse, which __________ the farm-to-table movement by
      serving local and seasonal food.

      Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the conventions
      of Standard English?

        A originating

        B to originate

        C having originated

        D originated


18.      Mark for Review
      American activists Dolores Huerta and Cesar Chavez founded the
      National Farm Workers Association in 1962 to defend the rights of
      farm workers through nonviolent organizing tactics, such as marches
      and boycotts. __________ organization merged with the Agricultural
      Workers Organizing Committee, led by Larry Itliong, to form United
      Farm Workers, a labor union that advocates on behalf of farm workers
      across the US.

      Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the conventions
      of Standard English?

        A Its

        B Their

        C It’s

        D They’re


19.      Mark for Review
      Researchers at the University of York found that people who are highly
      individualistic feel less connected to the natural world and engage in
      fewer activities to improve the environment; however, engaging with
      nature through activities such as walking and bird-watching can
      reconnect __________ to the natural world and encourage
      environmentally-friendly behaviors.

      Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the conventions
      of Standard English?

        A it

        B you

        C one

        D them


20.      Mark for Review
      National flags are designed to best represent and symbolize the
      individual __________ when countries share a history or culture, their
      flags are designed to look similar, thus creating a flag family that shares
      colors, shapes, or other elements.

      Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the conventions
      of Standard English?

         A country but

         B country,

         C country

         D country, but


21.      Mark for Review
      Scientists at the University of Illinois and the University of Lancaster
      observed that plants under very bright sunlight enter a protective mode
      for several minutes, during which they stop photosynthesizing and
      growing. If the crops were genetically modified to have a shorter time
      in protective mode, __________ The scientists resolved to find out.

      Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the conventions
      of Standard English?

         A could the crop yield increase?

         B the crop yield could increase?

         C the crop yield could increase.

         D could the crop yield increase.
22.      Mark for Review
      Take Our Daughters and Sons to Work Day originally started as a day
      focused on engaging girls with the workforce, Take Our Daughters to
      Work Day. On the national day, the fourth Tuesday in April, parents and
      caregivers go to work with their children; shadowing their parents or
      caregivers __________ children real-world experience and ideas for
      potential future careers.

      Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the conventions
      of Standard English?

        A offer

        B have offered

        C are offering

        D offers


23.      Mark for Review
      In order to allow olive ridley turtles to lay eggs on Versova Beach in
      Mumbai, community activist Afroz Shah organized a large group of
      volunteers to remove over 11 million pounds of trash. The beach now
      allows community members to connect with the natural world and
      __________ a healthy habitat for olive ridley turtles to use after a
      twenty-year absence.

      Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the conventions
      of Standard English?

        A provided

        B providing
        C provides

        D provide


24.      Mark for Review
      Yoga is an ancient discipline from India that aims to combine physical
      fitness with mental and spiritual control and calm and has expanded to
      become popular with many different cultures. __________ yoga is
      shifting into different forms to allow a wider range of people to
      participate. For example, accessible yoga provides opportunities for
      those with physical disabilities to access the health and mental benefits
      of the practice.

      Which choice completes the text with the most logical transition?

        A Nevertheless,

        B Similarly,

        C Thus,

        D Currently,


25.      Mark for Review
      Scientists often disagree about what traits to use to place newly
      discovered species in the tree of life and debate different ways to
      organize evolutionary relationships. Chimerarachne yingi,
      __________ is an extinct arachnid species that is sometimes placed
      near modern spiders based on its acquisition of silk-spinning organs or
      near other arachnids based on its loss of a tail.

      Which choice completes the text with the most logical transition?
        A as a result,

        B in comparison,

        C for example,

        D still,


26.      Mark for Review
      In 2011, a seismometer detected seismic activity from a magnitude 8.9
      earthquake and automatically cut the power to all 30 bullet trains in
      Japan, potentially avoiding mass architectural damage to the tracks.
      __________ the cut to the power prevented citizens from being caught
      in a dangerous location during the earthquake and allowed riders to
      seek shelter.

      Which choice completes the text with the most logical transition?

        A In addition,

        B In comparison,

        C For example,

        D Specifically,


27.      Mark for Review
      While researching a topic, a student has taken the following notes:
           The Endangered Species Act (ESA) was enacted in 1973 to
           recover species and prevent extinction.
           A species is listed under the ESA when it’s determined that the
           species needs protection and delisted when the population has
     recovered.
     Only 54 of the over 1,000 listed species have been delisted from
     the ESA, raising concerns about the effectiveness of the ESA.
     Erich Eberhard, David Wilcove, and Andrew Dobson conducted
     an analysis of population trends of species listed under the ESA.
     They found that most species had to wait multiple years before
     being listed and by then their populations were already so low that
     recovery was much more difficult.

The student wants to make a generalization about the kind of study
conducted by Eberhard, Wilcove, and Dobson. Which choice most
effectively uses relevant information from the notes to accomplish this
goal?

  A Scientists have analyzed population trends to find out the
    impact of legal protections in the realm of conservation.

  B Species listed under the ESA have low population levels
     when they are listed.

  C Only 54 once-listed species have been delisted; many more
    species have not recovered and are still listed.

  D Based on an analysis of population trends, Eberhard,
    Wilcove, and Dobson found that species listed under the
    ESA have very small populations when listed.
                  Section 1, Module 2—Harder: Reading and Writing

     SAT Prep Test 1—Reading and Writing
                             Module 2—Harder
Turn to Section 1 of your answer sheet to answer the questions in this section.


      DIRECTIONS

     The questions in this section address a number of important reading and
     writing skills. Each question includes one or more passages, which may
     include a table or graph. Read each passage and question carefully, and then
     choose the best answer to the question based on the passage(s).

     All questions in the section are multiple-choice with four answer choices. Each
     question has a single best answer.



1.      Mark for Review
     Dutch philosopher Baruch Spinoza argued as part of his rejection of
     dualism that all things, living or not, have the inclination to continue to
     exist and enhance themselves, a property he named “conatus.” All
     things, he believed, had the tendency to __________ and would only
     cease to be if acted upon by outside forces.

     Which choice completes the text with the most logical and precise
     word or phrase?

        A deteriorate

        B perish

        C persevere

        D disappear
2.      Mark for Review
     Many species demonstrate rescue behavior, a behavior in which an
     individual will help another in distress without any obvious benefit to
     the helper. In fact, this behavior __________ a recent study of
     Australian magpies when some birds in the study helped other birds
     remove the trackers that researchers had placed upon them, making it
     more difficult for the researchers to obtain data.

     Which choice completes the text with the most logical and precise
     word or phrase?

        A aided

        B impeded

        C clarified

        D exposed


3.      Mark for Review
     Dutch artist M.C. Escher’s work uses __________ to engage viewers
     by employing mathematical and intuitive processes to create images of
     objects that at first appear normal but on closer inspection are, in fact,
     impossible.

     Which choice completes the text with the most logical and precise
     word or phrase?

        A geometry

        B beauty

        C paradox
       D color


4.      Mark for Review
     Typically, pure water is not considered particularly __________ , but a
     team of scientists led by Richard Zare has discovered how
     microdroplets of water can turn into caustic hydrogen peroxide. When
     microdroplets of water hit a solid surface, an electric charge jumps
     between the water and the solid, producing hydroxyl radicals that, in
     turn, combine with remaining oxygen to form hydrogen peroxide.

     Which choice completes the text with the most logical and precise
     word or phrase?

       A viable

       B contaminated

       C common

       D reactive


5.      Mark for Review
     The Beat Generation, a literary subculture movement featured in works
     such as Allen Ginsberg’s Howl (1956) and William S. Burroughs’s
     Naked Lunch (1959), was characterized by its __________ the
     traditional values of the 1950s. The movement’s central message of
     nonconformity would be criticized by American literary critic Manuel
     Luis Martinez, who believed that the Beat Generation’s lack of
     attention to the politics of individualism undermined the movement’s
     goals.

     Which choice completes the text with the most logical and precise
     word or phrase?
       A dissension from

       B gratitude towards

       C adherence to

       D deference to


6.      Mark for Review
     The possibility of recycling used car tires as building materials is
     __________ indeed: the disposal of used tires is a major
     environmental problem, so potentially reusing them would be
     beneficial. Furthermore, initial studies have shown that walls made of
     used tires and dirt are more structurally robust than those made of
     concrete.

     Which choice completes the text with the most logical and precise
     word or phrase?

       A derivative

       B ludicrous

       C auspicious

       D innovative


7.      Mark for Review
     The Voynich manuscript was written on vellum dating from the fifteenth
     century in a script that is not found in any other source. Since
     cryptographers have yet to demonstrably decipher any portion of the
     text, the meaning and purpose of the Voynich manuscript remain
     __________ .
     Which choice completes the text with the most logical and precise
     word or phrase?

       A enigmatic

       B venerable

       C multifarious

       D coherent


8.      Mark for Review
     Astronautics owes much to the __________ contributions of Charles E.
     Whitsett. His ground-breaking development of the manned maneuvering
     unit enabled the first spacewalks in which astronauts were not tethered
     to a spacecraft.

     Which choice completes the text with the most logical and precise
     word or phrase?

       A dubious

       B futile

       C galvanizing

       D avant-garde


9.      Mark for Review
     The following text is adapted from Charles Dickens’s 1859 novel A
     Tale of Two Cities. Mr. Lorry, traveling to France on business, is
     delivering some news to Miss Manette, the daughter of one of his
     friends.
      “Miss Manette, I am a man of business. I have a business charge
      to acquit myself of. In your reception of it, don’t heed me any
      more than if I was a speaking machine—truly, I am not much
      else. I will, with your leave, relate to you, miss, the story of one
      of our customers.”

      “Story!”

      He seemed wilfully to mistake the word she had repeated, when
      he added, in a hurry, “Yes, customers; in the banking business we
      usually call our connection our customers. He was a French
      gentleman; a scientific gentleman; a man of great acquirements—
      a Doctor.”

      Based on the text, how does Mr. Lorry interact with Miss Manette?

        A Although he claims to be uninterested in the news, he makes
          purposeful decisions during his conversation with Miss
          Manette.

        B Although he is a professional, he misunderstands Miss
          Manette’s interjection.

        C Although he acts as if the news has no importance to him, he
          cannot keep the details of the story accurate.

        D Although he is unthinkingly following directions, he is
          flustered by Miss Manette’s rudeness.


10.      Mark for Review
      Nisga’a poet Jordan Abel addresses the experiences of Indigenous
      people as European settlers and their descendants took over North
      America. Abel’s first book of poetry, The Place of Scraps (2014), uses
      Totem Poles, a 1929 book by anthropologist Marius Barbeau, as source
      material. Abel claims that his use of Barbeau’s text shows how
      anthropological texts can be used to portray Indigenous people
      differently based on the author.

      Which finding, if true, would most directly support Abel’s claim?

        A Abel intersperses Barbeau’s text with images of Indigenous
          people and personal anecdotes written in the third person.

        B Abel explains that Barbeau presented two chiefs feuding
          over constructing the largest pole as unreasonable, yet
          other anthropologists claim that such arguments between
          chiefs of Indigenous tribes were important political
          exchanges.

        C The Place of Scraps won the Dorothy Livesay Poetry Prize
           and was a finalist for the Gerald Lampert Award.

        D Before Abel wrote The Place of Scraps, other Indigenous
          writers had used texts from anthropologists in their works.


11.      Mark for Review
      In Japan, adults may be legally adopted into a family. The practice may
      have started as early as the 13th century CE, but widespread adult
      adoption dates from the Tokugawa shogunate, a military government
      which began around 1600 CE. During this time, members of the ruling
      class would adopt competent adult males, who would then ensure that
      the family’s political and business interests would be sustained. While
      adult adoption remains a way for individuals to improve their
      economic and social status, the practice has its detractors as well, with
      some researchers arguing that it can lead to issues with the adoptee
      developing a firm sense of identity in his or her new environment.

      Which of the following best illustrates the researcher’s claim?
        A Adult adoptees are entitled to an inheritance from their
          adoptive families, strengthening the ties between them,
          which further encourages the adult adoptee to work to
          enhance the new family’s prosperity.

        B While most adult adoptees typically report improved
          financial status after adoption, many of those same
          adoptees also experience higher-than-normal rates of
          depression and anxiety.

        C Elsewhere in East Asia, such as in China and Korea,
          families have a traditional obligation to adopt blood
          relatives who lack more closely-related living kin, but
          adoptions in Japan are almost exclusively between those
          with no blood relations.

        D Families with ancestors who were adult adoptees do not
          distinguish between those ancestors who were members of
          the family by birth and those who were adopted into the
          family.


12.      Mark for Review
      Neurologists have hypothesized that tau protein, the mutation of which
      is known to cause Alzheimer’s disease, is key to controlling glutamate
      receptors, which are involved in the production of memories. Tau
      protein does not directly affect glutamate receptors but does inhibit
      NSF, an enzyme found in the brain.

      Which finding, if true, would most directly support the neurologists’
      hypothesis?

        A Other studies have shown that an excess of NSF has been
          shown to lead to abnormal glutamate receptor behavior.
        B Patients with Alzheimer’s disease have been found to have
           an excess of NSF in their brains during autopsies.

        C Neurologists do not yet know what causes mutations of tau
          protein; one hypothesis is that disease leads to these
          mutations.

        D Other types of dementia are not caused by mutations in tau
          protein but rather physical damage to the brain.


13.      Mark for Review
      From 1634 to 1637 CE, tulips in the Dutch Republic sold for
      extraordinarily high prices, sometimes as much as 10 times the annual
      wage of a skilled worker, in a phenomenon known as tulip mania. Some
      economists, such as Charles Kindleberger, argue that tulip mania was
      the first speculative bubble in history, during which the prices of a
      commodity (in this case tulip bulbs) do not follow the typical rules of
      economics. Others, such as Peter Garber, believe that tulip mania is
      explainable by fundamental economic concepts such as supply and
      demand.

      Which finding, if true, would most directly support Garber’s argument?

        A Tulips during this period were very rare, and demand for
          tulips was fueled in part by the ability to reproduce and
          sell bulbs, enabling some purchasers to make profits.

        B Some common bulbs, such as the Witte Croonen bulb, saw
           price increases as dramatic as those of rare bulbs.

        C The prices of tulip bulbs were much higher than could be
          supported by the banking system in place in 17th century
          Europe.
        D The tulip mania led to an increase of the supply of gold
          coins in the Dutch Republic.


14.      Mark for Review
      The use of pesticides in agriculture poses risks to both humans and the
      environment, so finding alternative methods of pest control is an
      important area of research. The use of ants to control pests in China
      goes back to at least the 4th century CE, and farmers in places such as
      Kenya, Ghana, and Canada have also used ants to control various
      organisms. Entomologist Diego Anjos and others have identified
      several positive effects (services) of ants, such as reducing both the
      abundance of non-honeydew-producing species and plant damage.
      However, ants also have negative effects, such as increasing the
      abundance of honeydew-producing species and spreading pathogens,
      suggesting that __________.

      Which choice most logically completes the text?

        A ants may have unintended environmental consequences
           when used to control pests in certain circumstances.

        B other species may also be effective in providing services to
           farmers.

        C ants as pest control provide numerous services without
           serious ramifications.

        D scientists do not yet know whether using ants to control
           organisms is a net positive in any situation.


15.      Mark for Review
      Among many animals, such as mice, fruit flies, and humans, each odor
      that an animal can smell is detected by a particular kind of sensory
      neuron that has a particular kind of receptor; eliminating that receptor
      through illness or genetic manipulation results in the inability to smell
      that odor. A team led by neurobiologist Margo Herre tested whether
      mosquitoes modified to lack the receptor for smelling blood would be
      unable to find humans. These mosquitoes were still able to find
      humans, suggesting that __________.

      Which choice most logically completes the text?

         A mosquitoes without damage to their odor receptors are more
           capable of finding humans than those with damage.

         B like mice, fruit flies, and humans, individual mosquitoes
            with damage to particular receptors will be unable to
            detect certain odors.

         C researchers cannot assume that mosquitoes have the same
            correlation between receptors and the ability to sense
            certain odors that mice, fruit flies, and humans have.

         D researchers can assume that interfering with mosquitoes’
            odor receptors is a potential way to prevent mosquitoes
            from feeding on humans.


16.      Mark for Review
      The North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) was an
      agreement among the United States, Canada, and Mexico that was in
      effect between 1994 and 2020. During this time, the number of
      manufacturing jobs in the United States and Canada declined, but the
      total number of manufacturing jobs in the countries covered by NAFTA
      increased. This suggests that, between 1994 and 2020, __________.
      Which choice most logically completes the text?

        A the number of manufacturing jobs in Mexico increased by a
           greater amount than the combined decreases in the United
           States and Canada.

        B NAFTA made it more difficult for manufacturers to
          establish factories in the United States and Canada.

        C the cost of manufacturing goods in the area covered by
           NAFTA decreased.

        D complex goods, such as automobiles and electronics, were
           increasingly manufactured in the United States, Canada, and
           Mexico.


17.      Mark for Review
      Researchers studying the recent eruption of Hunga Tonga–Hunga
      Ha’apai, a submarine volcano located near the islands of Tonga in the
      South Pacific, found that the volcanic cloud, compared to those of other
      eruptions, __________ the highest ever recorded.

      Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the conventions
      of Standard English?

        A have been

        B are

        C was

        D were


18.      Mark for Review
      Connectomes, extensive maps of neural connections in the brain, reveal
      that each person has a distinct pattern of connections known as a
      functional fingerprint. In a 2017 study, behavioral __________ found
      that about one-third of the functional fingerprint is unique to an
      individual and that other parts are inherited.

      Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the conventions
      of Standard English?

        A neuroscientist, Damien Fair,

        B neuroscientist Damien Fair

        C neuroscientist Damien Fair,

        D neuroscientist, Damien Fair


19.      Mark for Review
      Throughout her career, Muscogee Nation member and poet Joy Harjo
      has edited multiple anthologies that have highlighted Native voices in
      the US. For example, a map showcasing 47 Native Nations poets
      __________ her signature project during her time as the U.S. Poet
      Laureate.

      Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the conventions
      of Standard English?

        A was

        B are

        C have been

        D were
20.      Mark for Review
      When bees pollinate flowers, they may be exposed to insecticides,
      potentially affecting their nervous systems. Recently, Dr. Rachel
      Parkinson of the University of Oxford added the common __________
      to a sucralose solution to examine the insecticide’s impact on
      honeybees’ ability to walk in a straight line.

      Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the conventions
      of Standard English?

        A insecticide sulfoxaflor

        B insecticide, sulfoxaflor,

        C insecticide sulfoxaflor,

        D insecticide, sulfoxaflor


21.      Mark for Review
      In 1946, Juliet Rice Wichman acquired 1,000 acres on Kaua’i, one of
      the Hawaiian islands, to transform the land into a garden by removing
      grazing cattle and restoring terraces to grow taro. Wichman’s work to
      preserve the culture of Kaua’i wasn’t __________ as the first director
      of the Kaua’i Museum, she oversaw exhibits celebrating the history,
      culture, and art of Native Hawaiians.

      Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the conventions
      of Standard English?

        A finished though

        B finished. Though,

        C finished, though,
        D finished, though:


22.      Mark for Review
      Researchers studying bacteria have solved a 50-year mystery of how
      bacteria are able to move using appendages that are made of a single
      __________ the subunits of the protein can exist in 11 different shapes,
      allowing the appendages to “supercoil” into corkscrews that the
      bacteria use to propel themselves.

      Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the conventions
      of Standard English?

        A protein

        B protein while

        C protein,

        D protein:


23.      Mark for Review
      Fault tree analysis was originally used in engineering to enhance safety
      practices in high-risk fields, such as nuclear power and
      pharmaceuticals, but other fields are experimenting with ways to utilize
      this process to benefit their work. __________ fault tree analysis is
      also being used in low-risk fields, such as social services and software
      engineering.

      Which choice completes the text with the most logical transition?

        A Increasingly,

        B Nevertheless,
        C Therefore,

        D In addition,


24.      Mark for Review
      When Monika Sosnowska began her career in Amsterdam as a painter,
      she never expected to branch out into other media. __________ she had
      primarily worked on canvas, but she quickly found her works evolving
      to include the three-dimensional space around her.

      Which choice completes the text with the most logical transition?

        A Instead,

        B Consequently,

        C Previously,

        D Similarly,


25.      Mark for Review
      Fish sometimes appear in otherwise uninhabited bodies of water,
      seemingly emerging out of nowhere. Some scientists believe that the
      fish are carried to these locations in the beaks or talons of birds.
      __________ new research suggests that the fish eggs enter a state of
      hibernation and are actually eaten by birds and excreted out into the
      bodies of water.

      Which choice completes the text with the most logical transition?

        A For instance,

        B Next,
        C Likewise,

        D Alternatively,


26.      Mark for Review
      While researching a topic, a student has taken the following notes:
           To restore oyster reefs in Australia, limestone boulders are
           submerged to provide habitats, but baby oysters need help finding
           the boulders.
           A team from University of Adelaide looked into using sound as a
           way to encourage the baby oysters to attach to the boulders.
           The research team recorded sounds at the healthy Port Noarlunga
           Reef to play near the submerged boulders.
           Boulders in the area with the soundscape attracted around 17,000
           more oysters per square meter compared to boulders without the
           soundscape.
           Soundscapes can indicate a healthy place for baby oysters to grow
           and can be a cost-effective way to restore oyster reefs.

      The student wants to emphasize the aim of the research study. Which
      choice most effectively uses relevant information from the notes to
      accomplish this goal?

        A Researchers obtained a soundscape at Port Noarlunga Reef
          to help in the restoration of oyster reefs in Australia.

        B Researchers now know that the soundscape of a healthy
          marine ecosystem can attract baby oysters to attach to
          submerged limestone boulders.
        C After they measured the number of oysters attracted to
          boulders in the soundscape area compared to no
          soundscape, researchers determined that the soundscape
          attracted more baby oysters.

        D Researchers wanted to know whether a soundscape of a
          healthy marine ecosystem could encourage baby oysters to
          attach to submerged limestone boulders.


27.      Mark for Review
      While researching a topic, a student has taken the following notes:
           Neanderthals are an extinct species of humans who died out about
           40,000 years ago and are the closest evolutionary relatives of
           present-day humans.
           Studying the genomes of Neanderthals provides insight into human
           evolution.
           Professor Svante Pääbo is a Swedish geneticist and the director of
           the Department of Genetics at the Max Planck Institute for
           Evolutionary Anthropology.
           His landmark study presented the first draft sequence of the
           Neanderthal genome.
           Laurits Skov of the Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary
           Anthropology has a doctorate in bioinformatics and studied
           evolutionary anthropology.
           One of his recent studies revealed the genomes of a family of
           Neanderthals.

      The student wants to emphasize the affiliation and purpose of Pääbo’s
      and Skov’s work. Which choice most effectively uses relevant
      information from the notes to accomplish this goal?
     A The closest evolutionary relatives of present-day humans,
       Neanderthals went extinct about 40,000 years ago.

     B By studying the genomes of Neanderthals, Svante Pääbo and
       Laurits Skov of the Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary
       Anthropology provide insight into human evolution.

     C Svante Pääbo and Laurits Skov study the genome of
        Neanderthals, an extinct species of humans.

     D Studies by Svante Pääbo and Laurits Skov reveal
       information about Neanderthals, who died out about 40,000
       years ago.




                                 STOP
If you finish before time is called, you may check your work on this section only.
                   Do not turn to any other section in the test.
                                                    Section 2, Module 1: Math

                   SAT Prep Test 1—Math
                                    Module 1
Turn to Section 2 of your answer sheet to answer the questions in this section.


   DIRECTIONS

  The questions in this section address a number of important math skills.
  Use of a calculator is permitted for all questions.

   NOTES

  Unless otherwise indicated:
      All variables and expressions represent real numbers.
      Figures provided are drawn to scale.
      All figures lie in a plane.
      The domain of a given function f is the set of all real numbers x for which
      f(x) is a real number.

   REFERENCE




  The number of degrees of arc in a circle is 360.
  The number of radians of arc in a circle is 2π.
  The sum of the measures in degrees of the angles of a triangle is 180.
For multiple-choice questions, solve each problem, choose the correct answer from the
choices provided, and then circle your answer in this book. Circle only one answer for each
question. If you change your mind, completely erase the circle. You will not get credit for
questions with more than one answer circled, or for questions with no answers circled.

For student-produced response directions, solve each problem and write your answer
next to or under the question in the test book as described below.
    Once you’ve written your answer, circle it clearly. You will not receive credit for anything
    written outside the circle, or for any questions with more than one circled answer.
    If you find more than one correct answer, write and circle only one answer.
    Your answer can be up to 5 characters for a positive answer and up to 6 characters
    (including the negative sign) for a negative answer, but no more.
    If your answer is a fraction that is too long (over 5 characters for positive, 6 characters for
    negative), write the decimal equivalent.
    If your answer is a decimal that is too long (over 5 characters for positive, 6 characters for
    negative), truncate it or round at the fourth digit.

    If your answer is a mixed number (such as 3 ), write it as an improper fraction (7/2) or its

    decimal equivalent (3.5).

    Don’t enter symbols such as a percent sign, comma, or dollar sign in your circled answer.


   1.      Mark for Review
        A data set containing only the values 2, 2, 9, 9, 9, 16, 16, 16, 16, 26,
        26, and 26 is represented by a frequency table. Which of the following
        is the correct representation of this data set?
2.      Mark for Review
     The expression x2 – x – 56 is equivalent to which of the following?

       A (x – 14)(x+4)

       B (x – 7)(x+8)

       C (x – 8)(x+7)
       D (x – 4)(x+14)


3.      Mark for Review
     A carpenter hammers 10 nails per minute and installs 7 screws per
     minute during a project. Which of the following equations represents
     the scenario if the carpenter hammers nails for x minutes, installs
     screws for y minutes, and uses a combined total of 200 nails and
     screws?

       A

       B

       C 10x + 7y = 200

       D 10x + 7y = 3,420


4.      Mark for Review
     What is the measure of angle F in the triangle DEF, where angle D is
     73° and angle E is 35°?

       A 38°

       B 72°

       C 108°

       D 126°


5.      Mark for Review
     The total amount of plastic remaining to be recycled in a facility over x
     shifts is represented by the graph above. Which of the following
     represents the y-intercept of the graph?

       A The total amount of plastic remaining at any given time

       B The number of shifts it will take to finish recycling the
         plastic

       C The amount of plastic that is recycled per shift

       D The initial amount of plastic to be recycled


6.      Mark for Review
     The table below shows the condition and subject type for 200
     textbooks at a bookstore.

                Biology      Chemistry      Physics      Anatomy      Total
      Used         10            25            30           15          80
      New          30            25            10           55         120
      Total        40            50            40           70         200
     What is the probability that a textbook chosen at random will be a new
     textbook? (Express your answer as a decimal or fraction, not as a
     percent.)




7.      Mark for Review
     A random sample of 5,000 students out of 60,000 undergraduate
     students at a university were surveyed about a potential change to the
     registration system. According to the survey results, 75% of the
     respondents did not support the existing registration system, with a 4%
     margin of error. Which of the following represents a reasonable total
     number of students who did not support the existing registration
     system?

       A 1,250

       B 3,750

       C 13,800

       D 43,800


8.      Mark for Review
     What is the negative solution to the equation          ?




9.      Mark for Review
      After a hot air balloon is launched from a plateau 1,000 meters above
      sea level, it rises at a constant rate of 750 meters per minute. Which of
      the following best describes the function used to model the balloon’s
      distance above sea level over time?

        A Increasing linear

        B Increasing exponential

        C Decreasing linear

        D Decreasing exponential


10.      Mark for Review
      What is the x-intercept of the function f (x) = (22)x – 1 when it is
      graphed in the xy-plane, where y = f (x)?

        A (–1, 0)

        B (0, 0)

        C (21, 0)

        D (22, 0)


11.      Mark for Review




                           Note: Figure not drawn to scale.
      In parallelogram ABCD shown above, the length of AB is one-third the
      length of AD. The perimeter of the parallelogram is 64. What is the
      length of AB?

        A8

        B 16

        C 24

        D 32


12.      Mark for Review
      A triangle with an area of 18 square units has a base of (m + 5) units
      and a height of m units. What is the value of m?

        A4

        B9

        C 13

        D 36


13.      Mark for Review


           Time (seconds)          Number of colonies of yeast
                  0                             5
                  1                            20
                  2                            80
                  3                            320
      The table above shows the exponential growth of a type of yeast over
      time s, in seconds. There are c total yeast colonies on the count plate.
      What is the equation that represents this relationship, assuming that no
      yeast was added or removed after counting began?

        A c = (1 + 3)s

        B c = (1 + 5)s

        C c = 3(1 + 5)s

        D c = 5(1 + 3)s


14.      Mark for Review
      The equations 12x = y and 24x + 7 = 2y intersect at how many points
      when graphed in the xy-plane?

        A0

        B1

        C2

        D7


15.      Mark for Review
      Several tiles labeled with either an A or a B are placed in a bag, and
      tiles are worth a different point value depending on the label. The
      equation 15a + 10b = 100 represents the situation when a of the A tiles
      and b of the B tiles are drawn from the bag for a total of 100 points.
      How many points would be earned by drawing one A tile and one B
      tile from the bag?
16.      Mark for Review
      The amount of money remaining in a scholarship fund is reduced by
      one-fourth every year. The amount of money in the fund is represented
      by d and the number of years by y. If the fund starts with $10,000,
      which equation below represents this situation after y years?

        A

        B

        C


        D


17.      Mark for Review
      What is the diameter, in millimeters (mm), of a cylinder with a volume
      of 144π mm3 and a height of 4 mm?

        A6

        B9

        C 12

        D 36


18.      Mark for Review
                                4x + 2y = 4
                               19x + 10y = 14
      When graphed in the xy-plane, the linear equations shown above
      intersect at (a, b). What is the value of a?

        A –20

        B –10

        C6

        D 14


19.      Mark for Review
      The longest side of right triangle ABC is opposite angle B. If sin(A) =
        , what is the value of sin(C)?




20.      Mark for Review
      Function g reaches its maximum value when x = a. If g(x) = –6x2 – 30x
      – 24, what is the value of a?




21.      Mark for Review

                              f (x) =

      The linear function f (x), given above, is perpendicular to g(x) when
      graphed in the xy-plane. If g(0) = 0, what is the value of g(2)?
22.     Mark for Review
                            y = 5kx2 + 2x + 3



      The system of equations above has exactly one solution. If k is a
      constant, what is the value of k?
                                       Section 2, Module 2—Easier: Math

                   SAT Prep Test 1—Math
                             Module 2—Easier
Turn to Section 2 of your answer sheet to answer the questions in this section.


   DIRECTIONS

  The questions in this section address a number of important math skills.
  Use of a calculator is permitted for all questions.

   NOTES

  Unless otherwise indicated:
      All variables and expressions represent real numbers.
      Figures provided are drawn to scale.
      All figures lie in a plane.
      The domain of a given function f is the set of all real numbers x for which
      f(x) is a real number.

   REFERENCE




  The number of degrees of arc in a circle is 360.
  The number of radians of arc in a circle is 2π.
  The sum of the measures in degrees of the angles of a triangle is 180.
For multiple-choice questions, solve each problem, choose the correct answer from the
choices provided, and then circle your answer in this book. Circle only one answer for each
question. If you change your mind, completely erase the circle. You will not get credit for
questions with more than one answer circled, or for questions with no answers circled.

For student-produced response directions, solve each problem and write your answer
next to or under the question in the test book as described below.
    Once you’ve written your answer, circle it clearly. You will not receive credit for anything
    written outside the circle, or for any questions with more than one circled answer.
    If you find more than one correct answer, write and circle only one answer.
    Your answer can be up to 5 characters for a positive answer and up to 6 characters
    (including the negative sign) for a negative answer, but no more.
    If your answer is a fraction that is too long (over 5 characters for positive, 6 characters for
    negative), write the decimal equivalent.
    If your answer is a decimal that is too long (over 5 characters for positive, 6 characters for
    negative), truncate it or round at the fourth digit.

    If your answer is a mixed number (such as 3 ), write it as an improper fraction (7/2) or its
    decimal equivalent (3.5).

    Don’t enter symbols such as a percent sign, comma, or dollar sign in your circled answer.


   1.      Mark for Review
                                 33, 34, 38, 41, 43, 44, 47
        Which of the following is the median of the data listed above?

          A 38

          B 40

          C 41

          D 42


   2.      Mark for Review
        What is the value of the solution to the equation 22 = y – 10?
3.      Mark for Review
     A rectangle has a height of 23 inches (in) and a width of 9 in. What is
     its perimeter, in inches?

       A 32

       B 64

       C 207

       D 1,024


4.      Mark for Review
                              15a – (6a – 2a)

     Which of the following expressions is equivalent to the one above?

       A 5a

       B 7a

       C 11a

       D 23a


5.      Mark for Review
     Which equation represents the relationship between the numbers a and
     b if a is half of b?

       A
       B a=b–2

       C a=b+2

       D


6.      Mark for Review

     For all positive values of y, the expression     is equivalent to

            . What is the value of constant c?

       A3

       B6

       C8

       D 150


7.      Mark for Review
     A total of 200 pets were adopted at an event. If 70% of the adopted
     pets were dogs, how many of the pets were dogs?




8.      Mark for Review
     James must drive 100 miles before he can take his driver’s license test.
     He knows that when he drives around town running errands, he drives
     at an average speed of 20 miles per hour. If James maintains this
     average speed, how many hours must he drive to meet the requirement
     for his driver’s license test?
         A5

         B 20

         C 80

         D 100


 9.      Mark for Review
      What is the value of 4y – 16 if y – 4 = 11?




10.      Mark for Review
      The function g is defined as g(x) = x2 – 1. What is the value of g(x)
      when x = 3?

         A4

         B5

         C7

         D8


11.      Mark for Review
      The production cost p(x), in dollars, to produce x units of an item when
      materials cost $2 per item is given by p(x) = 2x + 150. What is the total
      cost to produce 2,000 units of this item?

         A $1,850
         B $2,300

         C $3,850

         D $4,150


12.      Mark for Review
      The function f is given as f (x) =       . When x = 6, what is the value of f
      (x)?

         A2

         B4

         C6

         D9


13.      Mark for Review




                            Note: Figure not drawn to scale.


      In the figure above, what is the value of d if line a is parallel to line b?
14.      Mark for Review
                                  3x – 4y = 17

      In the xy-plane, the graph of a line with an x-intercept of (c, 0) and a y-
      intercept of (0, k), where c and k are constants, can be represented by
      the equation above. What is the value of ?

         A

         B

         C

         D


15.      Mark for Review
      A postal machine processes mail at a constant rate of 21 pieces of mail
      per minute. At this rate, how many pieces of mail would the machine
      process in 7 minutes?

         A3

         B 14

         C 28

         D 147
16.      Mark for Review
      Stella had 211 invitations to send for an event. She has already sent 43
      invitations and will send them all if she sends 24 each day for the next
      d days. Which of the following equations represents this situation?

         A 24d – 43 = 211

         B 24d + 43 = 211

         C 43d – 24 = 211

         D 43d + 24 = 211


17.      Mark for Review


                     x         –1        0       1        2
                    f (x)      12       15       18       21

      When the linear function y = f (x) is graphed in the xy-plane, the graph
      contains the corresponding values of x and f (x) shown in the table
      above. Which of the following could represent the function?


         A f (x) = 3x + 12

         B f (x) = 3x + 15

         C f (x) = 15x + 12

         D f (x) = 15x + 15


18.      Mark for Review
      The height of a rocket launched from a rooftop can be modeled by the
      equation h = –16s2 + 64s + 21, where h is the height of the rocket
      above the ground, in feet, and s is the number of seconds since the
      rocket was launched. Which of the following represents the height, in
      feet, of the rooftop from which the rocket was launched?

        A0

        B 16

        C 21

        D 64


19.      Mark for Review
      Function f is defined by f (x) = x3 + 1. Which of the following tables
      gives three values of x and their corresponding values of y?




20.      Mark for Review
      If h(–1) = 3 and h(0) = 5 in linear function h, which of the following is
      the equation of function h?

         A h(x) = 2x + 5

         B h(x) = 2x + 3

         C h(x) = 2x

         D h(x) = 3x + 5


21.      Mark for Review
      Which of the following equations correctly expresses r in terms of p
      and s if the relationship between the numbers p, r, and s can be
      expressed as p = 13r – 6s?

         A

         B r = 13p + 6s

         C

         D


22.      Mark for Review
      Right triangle ABC has sides of the following lengths: AB = 165, BC =
      280, and AC = 325. Another triangle, LMN, is similar to ABC such that
      A corresponds to L and B corresponds to M. What is the value of
      cos(L)?

         A
B

C

D
                                      Section 2, Module 2—Harder: Math

                   SAT Prep Test 1—Math
                             Module 2—Harder
Turn to Section 2 of your answer sheet to answer the questions in this section.


   DIRECTIONS

  The questions in this section address a number of important math skills.
  Use of a calculator is permitted for all questions.

   NOTES

  Unless otherwise indicated:
      All variables and expressions represent real numbers.
      Figures provided are drawn to scale.
      All figures lie in a plane.
      The domain of a given function f is the set of all real numbers x for which
      f(x) is a real number.

   REFERENCE




  The number of degrees of arc in a circle is 360.
  The number of radians of arc in a circle is 2π.
  The sum of the measures in degrees of the angles of a triangle is 180.
For multiple-choice questions, solve each problem, choose the correct answer from the
choices provided, and then circle your answer in this book. Circle only one answer for each
question. If you change your mind, completely erase the circle. You will not get credit for
questions with more than one answer circled, or for questions with no answers circled.

For student-produced response directions, solve each problem and write your answer
next to or under the question in the test book as described below.
    Once you’ve written your answer, circle it clearly. You will not receive credit for anything
    written outside the circle, or for any questions with more than one circled answer.
    If you find more than one correct answer, write and circle only one answer.
    Your answer can be up to 5 characters for a positive answer and up to 6 characters
    (including the negative sign) for a negative answer, but no more.
    If your answer is a fraction that is too long (over 5 characters for positive, 6 characters for
    negative), write the decimal equivalent.
    If your answer is a decimal that is too long (over 5 characters for positive, 6 characters for
    negative), truncate it or round at the fourth digit.

    If your answer is a mixed number (such as 3 ), write it as an improper fraction (7/2) or its
    decimal equivalent (3.5).

    Don’t enter symbols such as a percent sign, comma, or dollar sign in your circled answer.


   1.      Mark for Review
        Which of the following is equivalent to 3a3 – 5a3 + 6a?

          A –2a3 + 6a

          B 3a3 + a

          C 4a

          D –15a9 + 6a


   2.      Mark for Review
        In a shipment of 45,000,000 shirts, 4,950,000 are white. What
        percentage of the shirts are white shirts?
        A 11%

        B 22%

        C 78%

        D 89%


3.      Mark for Review
     If 3(x – 8) – 16 = 8(x + 10) + x, what is the value of 6x?




4.      Mark for Review
                          8(a – 3) – 17 = 9(a – 3)
     In the equation above, what is the value of a – 3?

        A –20

        B –17

        C –14

        D3


5.      Mark for Review
     A school classroom with a total of 4,200 floor tiles is divided into a 30
     square-foot lab area and an 80 square-foot seating area. The number of
     tiles on the entire classroom floor can be represented by the equation
     30a + 80b = 4,200. In this context, which of the following does b
     represent?
       A The average number of tiles per square foot in the lab area

       B The total number of tiles in the lab area

       C The average number of tiles per square foot in the seating
         area

       D The total number of tiles in the seating area


6.      Mark for Review
     A triangle has a base that is 65% of its height. If the base were
     decreased by 13 inches, how would the height need to change to keep
     the same proportions?

       A It must increase by 13 inches.

       B It must increase by 20 inches.

       C It must decrease by 13 inches.

       D It must decrease by 20 inches.


7.      Mark for Review
     If             and a ≠ 0, which of the following correctly expresses b
     in terms of a?

       A

       B

       C
         D


 8.      Mark for Review

      For all positive values of y, the expression      is equivalent to

              . What is the value of constant c?

         A3

         B6

         C8

         D 150


 9.      Mark for Review
      In the xy-plane, the equation (x – 7)2 + (y + 7)2 = 64 defines circle O,
      and the equation (x – 7)2 + (y + 7)2 = c defines circle P. If the two
      circles have the same center, and the radius of circle P is three less than
      the radius of circle O, what is the value of constant c?




10.      Mark for Review
      A school has received a donation of $20,000 for the purchase of new
      laptops. If each laptop costs $149, no tax is charged, and the laptop
      manufacturer offers a 7.5% discount on orders of at least 100 laptops,
      what is the maximum number of laptops the school can purchase with
      the donation?

         A 124
        B 134

        C 145

        D 146


11.      Mark for Review
                               3x2 – y – 26 = 0
                                y = –3x + 10
      The point (a, b) is an intersection of the system of equations above
      when graphed in the xy-plane. What is a possible value of a?

        A –4

        B6

        C 20

        D 26


12.      Mark for Review
      How many values for y satisfy the equation –6(4y + 2) = 3(4 – 8y)?

        A Zero

        B Exactly one

        C Exactly two

        D Infinitely many


13.      Mark for Review
      A parabola represents the graph of the function f in the xy-plane, where
      y = f (x). If the vertex of the parabola is (5, –4) and one of the x-
      intercepts is (–1.5, 0), what is the other x-intercept?

        A (–6.5, 0)

        B (1.5, 0)

        C (3.5, 0)

        D (11.5, 0)


14.      Mark for Review




      Which equation defines function g, if the graph of y = g(x) – 10 is
      shown above?

        A
         B

         C

         D


15.      Mark for Review
      If c is a constant in the equation 10x2 + c = –5x, and the equation has no
      real solutions, what is the value of c?

         A –20

         B –5

         C0

         D1


16.      Mark for Review
                                  3x – 4y = 17

      In the xy-plane, the graph of a line with an x-intercept of (c, 0) and a y-
      intercept of (0, k), where c and k are constants, can be represented by
      the equation above. What is the value of ?

         A

         B

         C
         D


17.      Mark for Review
                                 –7 + 2f = cg
                              21g + 21 = 6f – 15g
      If c is a constant, and the system of equations shown above has
      infinitely many solutions, what is the value of c?




18.      Mark for Review
      Triangle A has angles measuring 30º, 60º, and 90º. What is the
      perimeter, in centimeters, of this triangle if the smallest side has a
      length of 15 centimeters?

         A

         B

         C

         D


19.      Mark for Review

                      x         2      4       6           8
                    g(x)       46      0      –46         –92
      Four values of x and their corresponding values of g(x) are shown in
      the table above for the linear function g. The equation g(x) = cx + d
      defines function g, and c and d are constants. What is the value of c +
      d?

         A –23

         B 69

         C 92

         D 115


20.      Mark for Review
                               114, 109, 106, 111
      A data set consists of 5 positive integers greater than 101. What is the
      value of the smallest integer in the data set if the mean of the entire data
      set is an integer that is less than the mean of the four integers from the
      data set shown above?




21.      Mark for Review
      A teacher awards points to a class based on completed assignments. He
      gives 5 points per assignment for the first 50 completed assignments
      and 3 points for each additional completed assignment beyond 50.
      When a ≥ 50, which function g gives the total number of points earned
      by the class for a completed assignments?

         A g(a) = 3a + 5

         B g(a) = 3a + 100
        C g(a) = 3a + 250

        D g(a) = 8a – 150


22.      Mark for Review
      In triangles ABC and XYZ, AB = 22, XY = 11, and angles A and X both
      measure 77°. Which of the following pieces of information, if any,
      would be enough to prove that the two triangles are similar to each
      other?

    I. Angle B measures 40°
   II. Angle Y measures 50°
  III. Angle Z measures 63°

        A No additional information is necessary.

        B Angle measures alone do not provide enough information.

        C I and II together provide enough information.

        D I and III together provide enough information.
Chapter 3
Practice Test 1: Answers and
Explanations
DIAGNOSTIC TEST 1: MULTIPLE-CHOICE
ANSWER KEY
Let’s take a look at how you did on Diagnostic Test 1. Follow the two-step
process in the scorecard below and read the explanations for any questions
you got wrong, or you struggled with but got correct. Once you finish
working through the scorecard and the explanations, go to the next chapter to
make your study plan.




Check your answers and mark any correct answers with a ✓ in
the appropriate column.

         Reading and Writing Comprehension—Module 1
 Q#     Ans.      ✓                     Chap. #Section
   1      D            7, Vocabulary
   2      B            7, Vocabulary
   3      B            7, Purpose (Sentence Function)
   4      A            7, Purpose (Sentence Function)
   5      D            7, Dual Texts
   6      A            8, Retrieval
7        A        8, Retrieval
8        A        8, Main Idea
9        A        8, Claims
10       B        8, Charts
11       A        8, Charts
12       B        8, Charts
13       D        8, Charts
14       A        8, Conclusions
15       C        16, Pronouns
16       C        13, Who or What Are You Talking About?
17       D        12, The Perfect Form
18       A        14, The Strongest Link
19       A        16, Pronouns
                  15, Don’t Go Where You’re Not Wanted-If You are
20       B
                  Punctuation
21       B        14, Picking Sides with Transitions
22       C        17, A Smooth Transition
23       D        17, A Smooth Transition
24       D        17, A Smooth Transition
25       C        17, A Smooth Transition
26       D        17, Ready, Set…Synthesize
27       C        17, Ready, Set…Synthesize

     Reading and Writing Comprehension—Module 2: Easier
Q#     Ans.   ✓                    Chap. #Section
1    D   7, Vocabulary
2    A   7, Vocabulary
3    C   7, Vocabulary
4    A   7, Vocabulary
5    B   7, Vocabulary
6    B   7, Vocabulary
7    A   7, Vocabulary
8    A   7, Vocabulary
9    C   8, Retrieval
10   D   8, Claims
11   D   8, Claims
12   C   8, Claims
13   C   8, Conclusions
14   C   8, Conclusions
15   A   8, Conclusions
16   A   8, Conclusions
17   D   12, The Perfect Form
18   B   16, Pronouns and Apostrophes
19   D   16, Pronouns
20   D   14, The Strongest Link
21   A   12, Answer in the Form of a Question
22   D   16, Verbs
23   C   12, The Perfect Form
24   D   17, A Smooth Transition
25      C        17, A Smooth Transition
26      A        17, A Smooth Transition
27      A        17, Ready, Set…Synthesize

    Reading and Writing Comprehension—Module 2: Harder
Q#    Ans.   ✓                    Chap. #Section
1       C        7, Vocabulary
2       B        7, Vocabulary
3       C        7, Vocabulary
4       D        7, Vocabulary
5       A        7, Vocabulary
6       C        7, Vocabulary
7       A        7, Vocabulary
8       D        7, Vocabulary
9       A        8, Retrieval
10      B        8, Claims
11      B        8, Claims
12      A        8, Claims
13      A        8, Claims
14      B        8, Conclusions
15      C        8, Conclusions
16      A        8, Conclusions
17      C        16, Verbs
18      B        13, Who or What Are You Talking About?
19      A        16, Verbs
20    A         13, Who or What Are You Talking About?
21    D         14, Picking Sides with Transitions
22    D         14, The Strongest Link
23    A         17, A Smooth Transition
24    C         17, A Smooth Transition
25    D         17, A Smooth Transition
26    D         17, Ready, Set…Synthesize
27    B         17, Ready, Set…Synthesize

                     Math—Module 1
Q#   Ans.   ✓                     Chap. #Section
1     B         24, What is a Frequency Table?
2     C         23, Equations of a Parabola
3     C         21, Write Your Own Equations
4     B         25, Triangles
5     D         22, Meaning In Context

       or
6               24, Probability
     0.6
7     D         24, What is Margin of Error?
8     –4        21, Solving Quadratic Equations
9     A         21, Growth and Decay
10    B         22, Plug In the Answers (PITA)
11    A         22, Plug In the Answers (PITA)
12    A         22, Plug In the Answers (PITA)
13    D         23, Function Fundamentals
14    A         23, Solving Systems of Equations
15    25        22, Meaning In Context
16    D         21, Growth and Decay
17    C         25, Volume
18    C         23, Points of Intersection

19              25, Triangles

20   –2.5       23, Equations of a Parabola
21    10        23, Parallel and Perpendicular Lines
22   2.4        23, Points of Intersection

                Math—Module 2: Easier
Q#   Ans.   ✓                     Chap. #Section
1     C         24, What is a Median?
2     32        21, Fundamentals of Digital SAT Algebra
3     B         25, Rectangles and Squares
4     C         21, Fundamentals of Digital SAT Algebra
5     A         21, Fundamentals of Digital SAT Algebra
6     B         21, Solving Rational Equations
7    140        24, Percentages
8     A         24, Rates
9     44        21, Solving for Expressions
10    D         23, Function Fundamentals
11    D         23, Function Fundamentals
12    B         23, Function Fundamentals
13   118        25, Lines and Angles
14    A         23, Equations of a Line
15    D         24, Rates
16    B         21, Write Your Own Equations
17    B         23, Function Fundamentals
18    C         23, Equations of a Parabola
19    D         23, Function Fundamentals
20    A         23, Function Fundamentals
21    D         21, Fundamentals of Digital SAT Algebra
22    A         25, Triangles

                Math—Module 2: Harder
Q#   Ans.   ✓                     Chap. #Section
1     A         21, Fundamentals of Digital SAT Algebra
2     A         24, Percentages
3    –120       21, Solving for Expressions
4     B         21, Solving for Expressions
5     C         22, Meaning In Context
6     D         24, Ratios and Proportions
7     B         22, Plugging In Your Own Numbers
8     B         21, Solving Rational Equations
9     25        23, Equation of a Circle
10    C         22, Plug In the Answers (PITA)
11    A         23, Points of Intersection
12    A         21, Fundamentals of Digital SAT Algebra
13   D     23, Equations of a Parabola
14   C     23, Graphing Functions
15   D     21, Solving Quadratic Equations
16   A     23, Equations of a Line
17   12    21, Solving Systems of Equations
18   C     25, Triangles
19   B     23, Function Fundamentals
20   105   24, Averages
21   B     22, Plugging In Your Own Numbers
22   D     25, Triangles
PRACTICE TEST 1—READING AND WRITING
EXPLANATIONS
Module 1
1.   D

     This is a Vocabulary question, as it’s asking for a logical and precise
     word or phrase for the blank. Read the text and highlight what can help
     fill in the blank. The text states that the risk of loss of human life in the
     event of an eruption is minimal, so the area surrounding Calabozos
     must not be very inhabited. A good word for the annotation box based
     on this information would be “isolated.”

         (A) and (B) are wrong because hazardous and active don’t match
         “isolated.”

         (C) is wrong because mountainous is a Could Be True trap:
         mountainous regions are often isolated, but the text does not support
         that the area surrounding Calabozos has any other mountains besides
         the volcano itself.

         (D) is correct because remote matches “isolated.”

2.   B

     This is a Vocabulary question, as it’s asking for a logical and precise
     word or phrase for the blank. Read the text and highlight what can help
     fill in the blank. The text states that H.D. wrote in a variety of forms
     and genres, yet her contemporaries focused only on her important
     contributions to the Imagist movement. Therefore, a good phrase for
     the annotation box based on this information would be that the
     contemporaries’ view was “narrow.”

         (A) is wrong because expansive is the Opposite of “narrow.”

         (B) is correct because limited matches “narrow.”
         (C) and (D) are wrong because imaginative and complicated don’t
         match “narrow.”

3.   B

     This is a Purpose question, as it’s asking for the function of a sentence.
     Read the text and highlight what can help understand the function of the
     second sentence. In the second sentence, Previous studies…have been
     unsuccessful because these studies relied on human subjects. In the
     third sentence, it states that A recent study by physiologists Yuta Senzai
     and Massimo Scanziani has avoided this issue by studying dreaming
     mice instead. Therefore, the second sentence must be describing an
     issue that the scientists in the third sentence avoided. Write “explain
     issue with previous studies” in the annotation box.

         (A) is wrong because it is the Opposite of what the text supports:
         previous studies ran into a problem, but the study by Yuta Senzai
         and Massimo Scanziani has avoided this issue.

         (B) is correct because it’s consistent with the relationship between
         the second and third sentences.

         (C) is wrong because it is Half-Right: the sentence mentions the
         studies before Senzai and Scanziani’s but does not present the
         findings of those studies.

         (D) is wrong because the text does not discuss anyone interpreting
         Senzai and Scanziani’s study.

4.   A

     This is a Purpose question, as it’s asking for the function of a sentence.
     Read the text and highlight what can help understand the function of the
     third sentence. In the third sentence, it states that electroreception is
     not limited to fish. Write “explain it’s not just fish” in the annotation
     box.

         (A) is correct because it’s consistent with the highlighting and
         annotation.

         (B) is wrong because it’s Half-Right: the fourth sentence explains
         how monotremes use electroreception, but the earlier sentences do
         not explain how fish use electroreception, just that they have it.

         (C) is wrong because it is Right Answer, Wrong Question: the
         fourth and possibly the fifth sentence give more examples of animals
         with electroreception, not the third sentence, which is what the
         question asks about.

         (D) is wrong because the text does not explain how electroreception
         evolved in any of the animals discussed.

5.   D

     This is a Dual Texts question, as it asks how the scientists in Text 2
     would most likely respond to those in Text 1. Read Text 1 and highlight
     the claim made by Premack and Woodruff regarding a theory of mind:
     after seeing videos of human actors struggling with various problems,
     the chimpanzees were able to select photographs that showed the
     best tool to solve each actor’s problem. Read Text 2 and highlight
     Povinelli, Nelson, and Boysen’s response to the same idea: it may be
     the case that chimpanzees are following learned behaviors in a
     known environment, rather than applying a theory of mind in a novel
     situation. Write in the annotation box for the highlighting in Text 2 that
     “Text 2 offers an alternate explanation.”

         (A) and (C) are wrong because neither text discusses any other
         nonhuman primates besides chimpanzees.
         (B) is wrong because it is Recycled Language: it’s the human
         subjects in Text 1 that are described as struggling with a problem
         and Text 2 never suggests that the chimpanzees could solve
         problems by struggling through the problems on their own.

         (D) is correct because it would address the scientists in Text 2’s
         main objection to the claim in Text 1: by placing the chimpanzees in
         novel environments that they would have been unlikely to
         encounter previously, Premack and Woodruff could better
         determine whether the chimpanzees have a theory of mind rather
         than are just following learned behaviors in a known environment.

6.   A

     This is a Retrieval question, as it says According to the text. Read the
     text and highlight what is said about Dorian. The text mentions that his
     cheeks flushed for a moment with pleasure and A look of joy came
     into his eyes upon seeing his picture. He knows that Hallward was
     speaking to him, but he was not catching the meaning of his words.
     Lastly, The sense of his own beauty came on him like a revelation.
     The correct answer should be consistent with as many of these ideas as
     possible.

         (A) is correct because it exactly describes what is occurring in the
         text. Dorian cannot focus on what Hallward is saying because of the
         beauty of his own picture.

         (B) is wrong because it is Extreme Language: Dorian can’t focus
         on what Hallward is saying, but the text never goes so far as to state
         that Dorian thinks it’s unimportant.

         (C) is wrong because it is the Opposite of the text: not only does
         Dorian recognize his own image, but he is also immensely pleased
         by it.
         (D) is wrong because nothing about how easily Dorian gets
         embarrassed is mentioned in the text.

7.   A

     This is a Retrieval question, as it says Based on the text. Read the text
     and highlight what is said about the children. The text states that the old
     forester wondered What would become of them (the children)—living
     in so sequestered a spot that few even knew of its existence—totally
     shut out from the world, and left to their own resources? The correct
     answer should be as consistent with this description of the children as
     possible.

         (A) is correct because isolated from people other than the old
         forester is consistent with totally shut out from the world.

         (B) is wrong because it is Extreme Language: while the forester is
         worried about what would happen to the children if left alone, the
         text does not indicate that the children would be completely unable
         to take care of themselves.

         (C) is wrong because it is the Opposite of the forester’s feelings
         towards the children: he feels responsible for them, not resentful of
         them.

         (D) is wrong because it is Recycled Language: the answer misuses
         the word responsibility from the text and never indicates that the
         children help the forester with his tasks.

8.   A

     This is a Main Idea question, as it asks for the main idea of the text.
     Read the text and highlight the main phrases or lines that all of the other
     sentences seem to support. The citation states that the author is
     addressing an unknown person. The opening two lines state that the
     author will never hold a place in this person’s (thine) heart until the
     author renounces all sense, all shame, all grace. The author also states
     at the end of the poem that this individual will make an offer with
     corrupting art / The rotten borough of the human heart. The main
     idea would be that author’s feelings towards this individual in this
     poem are negative, and the correct answer should be consistent with
     this.

         (A) is correct because it is consistent with the main idea and
         disapproval towards the unknown person is expressed several
         times in the poem.

         (B) and (D) are wrong because the poem never states what the
         unknown person feels towards the author, just what the author feels
         towards the unknown person. Choice (D) is also Recycled
         Language and warps the meaning of the opening line of the text.

         (C) is wrong because it is Recycled Language: the author is not
         referring to a literal seat. Rather, the seat is a metaphor for the place
         the speaker may hold in the unknown person’s heart.

9.   A

     This is a Claims question, as it asks for what answer would support
     Soni and his team’s claim. Read the text and highlight the claim made
     by Soni’s team, which is that administering ketone esters can reduce
     inflammation and immune system weakening caused by sepsis.

         (A) is correct because it shows ketone esters to be more effective at
         reducing inflammation and reducing damage to organs (which the
         text states are connected to immune system response) than at least
         one other treatment, standard antibiotics.
        (B) is wrong because it does not address the items mentioned in the
        claim, referencing blood ketone levels and energy rather than
        inflammation and the immune system or organ damage.

        (C) is wrong because the text does not mention medication intended
        to reduce fever or how such medication would affect the
        performance of ketone esters.

        (D) is wrong because it is Half-Right: patients treated with ketone
        esters should have reduced inflammation, but they should have less
        organ damage, not greater organ damage, than those treated with
        other treatments, such as standard antibiotics.

10. B

   This is a Charts question as it asks about data from the table that will
   complete an example. Read the table first and note the title and terms
   on the table. Then, read the text and look for a claim and example that
   mentions those same terms. The fourth sentence states that horses with
   only one handler were less reluctant to interact with the novel object
   than were horses with multiple handlers. The example states that 45%
   of horses with only one handler had no reluctance when interacting
   with a novel object, so a good completion of this example would
   compare that statistic to a statistic regarding multiple handlers while
   remaining consistent with the claim in the fourth sentence.

        (A) and (D) are wrong because they don’t mention multiple
        handlers, which are needed to be consistent with the text’s claim.

        (B) is correct because it shows that horses with multiple handlers
        only had no reluctance towards interacting with the novel object
        25% of the time, whereas horses with only one handler showed no
        reluctance 45% of the time, making them less reluctant overall as the
        claim states.
        (C) is wrong because the claim and the first half of the example
        address no reluctance rather than strong reluctance. It’s best to
        compare two items from the same row or same column to complete
        comparisons, depending on what the problem is looking for.

11. A

   This is a Charts question as it asks about data from the table that will
   illustrate a claim. Read the table first and note the title and variables.
   Then, read the text and look for a claim that mentions those same terms.
   The fourth sentence states that starting with the 1989 election, the
   party which won the largest number of seats failed to win more than
   half of the total seats. The final sentence claims that This trend was
   eventually broken by the Bharatiya Janata Party. The correct answer
   should offer evidence from the table that supports the Bharatiya Janata
   Party breaking the trend described in the fourth sentence.

        (A) is correct because it is consistent with the table for those years
        and shows the Bharatiya Janata Party holding both the largest
        number of seats and a majority of the total seats.

        (B), (C), and (D) are wrong because none of them mention the
        Bharatiya Janata Party winning a majority, or more than half of the
        total seats, as stated in the text.

12. B

   This is a Charts question as it asks about data from the table that will
   support a hypothesis. Read the table first and note the title and terms.
   Then, read the text and look for a hypothesis that mentions those same
   terms. The last sentence states that A group of researchers…
   hypothesized that those who take vitamin B12 would experience
   improvements in fibrosis and insulin resistance when compared to a
   control group over the same time period. The correct answer should
   use data from the table to support this idea.

        (A) is wrong because it only talks about the control group and not
        the Vitamin B12 group.

        (B) is correct because it references both groups and is consistent
        with the relationship between those groups stated by the claim in the
        text.

        (C) and (D) are wrong because neither mentions the terms fibrosis
        and insulin resistance that were referenced by the claim.

13. D

   This is a Charts question as it asks about data from the table that will
   complete a statement. Read the table first and note the title and terms.
   Then, read the text and look for a statement that mentions those same
   terms. The last sentence states that The localized nature of weather
   patterns during this event can be seen by comparing Newark, NJ, and
   New York, NY, with ______ . The correct answer should complete this
   statement regarding localized weather patterns by showing a difference
   in mean levels of carbon monoxide in Newark and New York when
   compared to a more distant city.

        (A), (B), and (C) are wrong because the mean levels of carbon
        monoxide shown for Washington, D.C., and Philadelphia, PA, on the
        dates in each answer are similar or identical to the levels in New
        York, NY, on those dates. Farther cities from Newark showing
        similar levels to neighboring cities to Newark would not show the
        localized nature of weather patterns during the smog event.

        (D) is correct because Washington, D.C., shows zero carbon
        monoxide recorded on those dates, while Newark and New York
        show positive carbon monoxide level.

14. A

   This is a Conclusions question as it asks for an answer that logically
   completes the text. Read the text and highlight the main ideas. The text
   states that neurons change how they respond to stimuli based on
   previous experience and that electrical engineers seek to replicate
   similar processes in their development of computer memory. Lastly,
   electrical engineer Mohammad Samizadeh Nikoo has demonstrated
   that vanadium dioxide (VO2) has a similar memory property to that of
   neurons. The correct answer should be consistent with these ideas and
   establish a logical link between them.

        (A) is correct because it establishes a link between VO2 from the
        last sentence and the computer memory that electrical engineers are
        trying to work on from the second sentence.

        (B) and (C) are wrong because both are Recycled Language. For
        (B), it’s never stated that neurons use VO2 in any way, just that they
        have a similar memory property. Choice (C) takes the words
        neurons, VO2, and stimuli from sensory organs and combines them
        in a way not supported by the text.

        (D) is wrong because it uses Extreme and Recycled Language: it
        is VO2, not neurons, that may be helpful for computer memory.
        Furthermore, the text supports this is only a possibility, whereas the
        answer states that the engineers can now use it.

15. C

   In this Rules question, pronouns are changing in the answer choices, so
   it’s testing consistency with pronouns. Find and highlight the word the
   pronoun refers back to, books, which is plural, so a plural pronoun is
   needed. Write an annotation saying “plural.” Eliminate any answer that
   isn’t consistent with books.

        (A) is wrong because some doesn’t refer back to a specific thing.

        (B) and (D) are wrong because they are singular.

        (C) is correct because they is plural and is consistent with books.

16. C

   In this Rules question, commas and the word that are changing in the
   answers, which suggests that the question is testing the construction of
   describing phrases. The first part of the sentence says In 1988, the
   group worked together to form Action Deaf Youth, which is an
   independent clause followed by a comma. Eliminate any answer that
   isn’t consistent with the first part of the sentence.

        (A) is wrong because a phrase starting with “that” is Specifying and
        never follows a comma.

        (B) and (D) are wrong because they both create a run-on sentence.

        (C) is correct because it creates a Specifying phrase with that and
        no punctuation.

17. D

   In this Rules question, verb forms are changing in the answer choices,
   so it’s testing sentence structure. If the main verb is in the wrong form,
   the sentence won’t be complete. The subject of the sentence is Her
   experience, but there is no main verb, so one is needed. Eliminate any
   answer that does not produce a complete sentence.
        (A) is wrong because a “to” verb can’t be the main verb in a
        sentence.

        (B) is wrong because it lacks a main verb and thus creates an
        incomplete sentence.

        (C) is wrong because an -ing verb can’t be the main verb in a
        sentence.

        (D) is correct because inspired is in the right form to be the main
        verb and make a complete sentence.

18. A

   In this Rules question, punctuation is changing in the answer choices, so
   look for independent clauses. The first part of the sentence says
   American artist Simone Leigh creates art in various mediums,
   including sculptures, video, and performance, which is an
   independent clause. The second part says discussing the themes and
   images in her artwork, Leigh has emphasized that Black women are
   her primary audience…, which is also an independent clause.
   Eliminate any answer that can’t correctly connect two independent
   clauses.

        (A) is correct because a period is appropriately used after an
        independent clause.

        (B) is wrong because it creates a run-on sentence.

        (C) and (D) are wrong because neither a comma by itself nor a
        coordinating conjunction by itself can connect two independent
        clauses.

19. A
   In this Rules question, pronouns are changing in the answer choices, so
   it’s testing consistency with pronouns. Find and highlight the word the
   pronoun refers back to, wet-folding, which is singular, so a singular
   pronoun is needed. Write an annotation saying “singular.” Eliminate any
   answer that isn’t consistent with wet-folding.

        (A) is correct because it is singular and is consistent with wet-
        folding.

        (B) and (D) are wrong because they are plural.

        (C) is wrong because one doesn’t refer back to a specific thing.

20. B

   In this Rules question, punctuation is changing in the answer choices.
   Look for independent clauses. The first part of the sentence says His
   2004 installation The Glassy Surface of a Lake. The verb (uses)
   comes right after this. A single punctuation mark can’t separate a
   subject and a verb, so eliminate answers with punctuation.

        (A), (C), and (D) are wrong because a single punctuation mark can’t
        come between a subject and a verb.

        (B) is correct because no punctuation should be used here.

21. B

   In this Rules question, punctuation with a transition is changing in the
   answer choices. The first part of the sentence says Not all of the styles
   survived beyond that time. There is an option to add however to this
   independent clause, and since it is contrasting with the previous idea,
   eliminate options that don’t include however in the first part or are
   incorrectly punctuated.
        (A) is wrong because it doesn’t put however with the first
        independent clause.

        (B) is correct because however is part of the first independent
        clause.

        (C) and (D) are wrong because a comma can’t be used to connect
        two independent clauses.

22. C

   This is a transition question, so follow the basic approach. Highlight
   ideas that relate to each other. The previous sentence says Calede first
   compared measurements of the beaver’s ankle, and the next sentence
   says Calede dated the species to approximately 30 million years ago.
   These ideas are different steps Calede took, so a same-direction
   transition is needed. Make an annotation that says “agree.” Eliminate
   any answer that doesn’t match.

        (A) is wrong because for example introduces an example not stated
        in the text.

        (B) is wrong because in conclusion introduces a conclusion not
        present in the text.

        (C) is correct because next introduces another step in a sequence.

        (D) is wrong because in fact is used to give more detail, which is
        not present.

23. D

   This is a transition question, so follow the basic approach. Highlight
   ideas that relate to each other. The previous part of the paragraph says
   Male and female American citizens had starkly different roles during
   World War II and lists the roles of men, and the sentence in question
   says women were responsible for maintaining the home and
   supporting the men. These ideas disagree, so an opposite-direction
   transition is needed. Make an annotation that says “disagree.” Eliminate
   any answer that doesn’t match.

        (A) and (C) are wrong because they are same-direction transitions.

        (B) is wrong because instead introduces an alternative, but the
        paragraph discusses the different roles of men and women, not
        alternative roles for men.

        (D) is correct because meanwhile shows that women had different
        roles during the same time period.

24. D

   This is a transition question, so follow the basic approach. Highlight
   ideas that relate to each other. The first sentence says some patients
   with damaged ear structures are not able to use traditional cochlear
   implants, and the next sentence tells what researchers are working on
   as a result of this problem. These ideas agree, so a same-direction
   transition is needed. Make an annotation that says “agree.” Eliminate
   any answer that doesn’t match.

        (A) is wrong because there is no first step in the paragraph.

        (B) is wrong because the last sentence is not an addition to the
        previous sentence.

        (C) is wrong because finally is used to indicate the last step or a
        conclusion.

        (D) is correct because hence suggests that the last sentence is an
        effect of the previous sentence.
25. C

   This is a transition question, so follow the basic approach. Highlight
   ideas that relate to each other. The previous sentence says Her
   materials are often perishable and biological and are not
   traditionally used for artwork, and the next sentence says Yi spends
   almost as much time transforming these substances into completely
   new materials as she does creating the actual art pieces. These ideas
   agree, so a same-direction transition is needed. Make an annotation that
   says “agree.” Eliminate any answer that doesn’t match.

        (A) and (B) are wrong because they are opposite-direction
        transitions.

        (C) is correct because in fact adds detail to the previous sentence.

        (D) is wrong because the last sentence is not a conclusion.

26. D

   This is a Rhetorical Synthesis question, so follow the basic approach.
   Highlight the goal(s) stated in the question: emphasize a difference
   between the two numeral systems. Eliminate any answer that doesn’t
   fulfill this purpose.

        (A) is wrong because it states a similarity between the two numeral
        systems.

        (B) is wrong because it doesn’t mention both numeral systems.

        (C) is wrong because it doesn’t mention a difference between the
        systems.

        (D) is correct because it states differences between the two numeral
        systems and uses the contrast word while.
27. C

     This is a Rhetorical Synthesis question, so follow the basic approach.
     Highlight the goal(s) stated in the question: present the Newen Antug
     study and its conclusions. Eliminate any answer that doesn’t fulfill this
     purpose.

         (A), (B), and (D) are wrong because they do not include a
         conclusion—what the researchers found.

         (C) is correct because canoes were used as coffins is a conclusion.

Module 2—Easier
1.   D

     This is a Vocabulary question, as it’s asking for a logical and precise
     word or phrase for the blank. Read the text and highlight what can help
     fill in the blank. The text states that Shakespeare intentionally
     provided no stage directions as to what should happen in a scene, so
     it’s logical that he meant for future directors to use their own artistic
     interpretations. A good word for the annotation box based on this
     information would be “freedom.”

         (A) and (B) are wrong because confusion and dedication don’t
         match “freedom.”

         (C) is wrong because it is the Opposite of what the text states—
         Shakespeare provided no stage directions.

         (D) is correct because liberty matches “freedom.”

2.   A

     This is a Vocabulary question, as it’s asking for a logical and precise
     word or phrase for the blank. Read the text and highlight what can help
     fill in the blank. The text states that the fossils were exclusively found
     in caves in southern China and that anyone claiming to have found
     the remains of Gigantopithecus elsewhere would be mistaken. A good
     phrase for the annotation box based on this information would be “only
     in” that region.

         (A) is correct because restricted to matches “only in.”

         (B) and (D) are wrong because eliminated from and unknown to are
         the Opposite of “only in.”

         (C) is wrong because common in doesn’t match “only in.”

3.   C

     This is a Vocabulary question, as it’s asking for a logical and precise
     word or phrase for the blank. Read the text and highlight what can help
     fill in the blank. The text states that artificial intelligence will not
     displace human beings but will undoubtedly become smarter than
     people within this generation. The next sentence calls this a
     possibility. A good word for the annotation box would be that
     Kurzweil “hypothesizes” what will happen.

         (A) is wrong because proves is Extreme Language: it goes too far
         beyond “hypothesizes.”

         (B) and (D) are wrong because requires and denies don’t match
         “hypothesizes.”

         (C) is correct because predicts matches “hypothesizes.”

4.   A

     This is a Vocabulary question, as it’s asking for a logical and precise
     word or phrase for the blank. Read the text and highlight what can help
     fill in the blank. The text states that the Stanford Prison Experiment
     supposedly demonstrated an idea: supposedly means that the author
     does not think the experiment actually demonstrated that idea. The text
     also notes that the individuals were of the same background rather
     than representing a diverse sampling of subjects. Since all of this
     supports the point made in the first sentence, a good word or phrase for
     the annotation box would be “shows” or “is an example of.”

         (A) is correct because illustrates matches “shows.”

         (B) and (D) are wrong because refutes and critiques are the
         Opposite tone of “shows.”

         (C) is wrong because supersedes, which means “overrides,”
         doesn’t match “shows.”

5.   B

     This is a Vocabulary question, as it’s asking for a logical and precise
     word or phrase for the blank. Read the text and highlight what can help
     fill in the blank. The text states that prosopagnosia is also called “face
     blindness,” so a good word for the annotation box would be the
     “inability” to recognize faces.

         (A) and (C) are wrong because capability and tendency are the
         Opposite of “inability.”

         (B) is correct because incapacity matches “inability.”

         (D) is wrong because reluctance suggests not wanting to do
         something, which isn’t the same as “inability.”

6.   B
     This is a Vocabulary question, as it’s asking for a logical and precise
     word or phrase for the blank. Read the text and highlight what can help
     fill in the blank. The text states that the shark has a competitive
     advantage…due to electroreception, or ability to detect electrical
     impulses. A good phrase for the annotation box based on this
     information would be “detection ability.”

         (A) and (D) are wrong because allergy and aversion are the
         Opposite of the shark’s “ability” being a competitive advantage.

         (B) is correct because sensitivity matches “detection ability.”

         (D) is wrong because indifference, which means not having a
         preference, doesn’t match “detection ability.”

7.   A

     This is a Vocabulary question, as it’s asking for a logical and precise
     word or phrase for the blank. Read the text and highlight what can help
     fill in the blank. The text states that cryptographers have yet to
     demonstrably decipher any portion of the text, so a good word for the
     annotation box to describe the meaning and purpose of the Voynich
     manuscript would be “mysterious.”

         (A) is correct because enigmatic matches “mysterious.”

         (B) and (D) are wrong because venerable and coherent don’t match
         “mysterious.”

         (C) is wrong because it is a Could Be True trap answer. While
         multifarious, or complex, things can be mysterious, the words are
         not synonyms: mysterious things can be simple and complex things
         can be quite well known and understood.

8.   A
     This is a Vocabulary question, as it’s asking for a logical and precise
     word or phrase for the blank. Read the text and highlight what can help
     fill in the blank. The text states after the colon that the relationship
     between the crocodile and bird nourishes the bird while
     simultaneously promoting the crocodile’s dental health. A good
     phrase for the annotation box based on this information would be
     “mutually beneficial.”

         (A) is correct because interdependent matches “mutually
         beneficial.”

         (B), (C), and (D) are incorrect because inexplicable (puzzling),
         enthralling (fascinating), and inarticulate (unclear) don’t match
         “mutually beneficial.”

9.   C

     This is a Retrieval question, as it says According to the text. Read the
     text and highlight what is said about Captain Vere. The text states that
     he is a sailor of distinction, was mindful of the welfare of his men,
     but never tolerating an infraction of discipline, versed in the science
     of his profession, and intrepid. The correct answer should be as
     consistent with these qualities as possible.

         (A) is wrong because it is the Opposite of the text: Vere is mindful
         of his men’s welfare.

         (B) is wrong because it is Recycled Language: this answer
         misuses nobility from the text, which never states that Vere has an
         aristocratic background.

         (C) is correct because it is consistent with the Vere’s qualities in the
         text.
        (D) is wrong because the text doesn’t state which lifestyle Vere
        prefers.

10. D

   This is a Claims question, as it asks for an illustration of the claim in
   the question. Read the text and highlight the claim made, which is that
   the poem conveys the speaker’s sadness that his life as an adult does
   not compare favorably to his childhood.

        (A), (B), and (C) are wrong because they are all Half-Right: each
        focuses on some element or description from the speaker’s
        childhood but makes no comparisons to the speaker’s adult life.

        (D) is correct because ‘tis little joy is consistent with sadness and
        To know I’m farther off from heav’n / Than when I was a boy is
        consistent with the speaker’s life as an adult not comparing
        favorably to childhood.

11. D

   This is a Claims question, as it asks for an illustration of the claim in
   the question. Read the text and highlight the claim made, which is that
   Harker conveys his belief that he has become Dracula’s prisoner.

        (A), (B), and (C) are wrong because while in each of them the
        speaker expresses negative emotions toward a place (dread,
        loneliness, fear), none of these answers support the idea that the
        speaker is Dracula’s prisoner.

        (D) is correct because the speaker rushed up and down the stairs,
        trying every door and peering out of every window and after this
        still has a feeling of helplessness. This would be the best support
        toward the idea that the narrator is at least trapped or imprisoned.
12. C

   This is a Claims question, as it asks for an illustration of the claim in
   the question. Read the text and highlight the claim made, which states
   that the poem is meant to be a plea towards others to join the war
   effort.

        (A), (B), and (D) are wrong because none of these answers include
        any call to an or group to fight or take any action.

        (C) is correct because the answer describes a torch that is being
        thrown to someone from those with failing hands, with the hope that
        the new holder would hold the torch high. These lines best support a
        plea towards others even if they don’t directly reference any war
        effort.

13. C

   This is a Conclusions question as it asks for an answer that logically
   completes the text. Read the text and highlight the main ideas. The text
   states that The curator of a museum claims that the dress was worn at
   the presidential inauguration in 1865. Radiocarbon dating, on the
   other hand, reveals that the sleeves of the dress…date back to the
   1975–2005 period. If both are assumed to be correct as the text says,
   the correct answer to the question must be consistent with both claims.

        (A) is wrong because it is Recycled Language: it’s applying the
        error range of about thirty years to the year 1865, but the error
        range is mentioned when discussing radiocarbon dating in a
        completely separate part of the text.

        (B) is wrong because it is a Could Be True trap: as logical as it is
        that dresses would be recovered more frequently from modern times
        than from older times, the text does not state anything to this regard.
        (C) is correct because it shows how both claims could be correct,
        offering a possible reason for the contradictory statements made by
        the claims.

        (D) is wrong because the text never discusses what material was
        used to make the dress or whether it was different from the materials
        used for most other dresses.

14. B

   This is a Conclusions question as it asks for an answer that logically
   completes the text. Read the text and highlight the main ideas. The text
   states that paleontologists largely believed that there were no
   undocumented prehistoric aquatic species that had survived to the
   early 1900s. However, just such a species was found off the coast of
   South Africa as recently as 1938. These two claims indicate that there
   is indeed at least one undocumented species that survived. The correct
   answer should be consistent with this idea.

        (A) is wrong because it is Recycled Language: this answer
        mentions breeding population from the text, but no numbers
        regarding breeding population for the coelacanth are given.

        (B) is correct because the coelacanth from the second sentence did
        indeed go undiscovered longer than the 1900’s paleontologists
        expected it would—they had thought there were no undocumented
        prehistoric aquatic species in their era.

        (C) is wrong because the text never states that the scientists ignored
        any evidence.

        (D) is wrong because it is a Could Be True trap: it uses outside
        knowledge of when the dinosaurs went extinct to make an
        assumption regarding a similar fate for most coelacanths.
15. A

   This is a Conclusions question, as it asks for an answer that logically
   completes the text. Read the text and highlight the main idea: The door-
   in-the-face technique involves initially making an outrageous or
   unappealing offer, which the other person is likely to refuse, then
   following up with a more reasonable one. The concluding sentence to
   the text must be consistent with this main idea.

        (A) is correct because the second amount requested is
        comparatively much smaller than the first.

        (B) is wrong because the first request of 3% is unlikely to be
        considered outrageous when compared to 2%.

        (C) is wrong because according to the door-in-the-face technique in
        the text, the more outrageous amount should be asked for first.

        (D) is wrong because the two amounts are the same and therefore
        neither one would be considered outrageous compared to the other.

16. A

   This is a Conclusions question, as it asks for an answer that logically
   completes the text. Read the text and highlight the main ideas. The
   focus of the text is on NAFTA and its relation to manufacturing jobs.
   During the interval from 1994 to 2020, the second sentence states that
   the number of manufacturing jobs in the United States and Canada
   declined, but the total number of manufacturing jobs in the countries
   covered by NAFTA increased. Therefore, a logical conclusion would
   explain how this might be possible.

        (A) is correct because if an increase in the number of
        manufacturing jobs in Mexico, which is also covered by NAFTA,
        was greater than the combined decreases in the United States and
        Canada, this would explain the seemingly contradictory data in the
        second sentence.

        (B), (C), and (D) are wrong because none of them offers a reason as
        to how the number of manufacturing jobs in the United States and
        Canada declined, but the total number of manufacturing jobs in all
        three countries increased.

17. D

   In this Rules question, verb forms are changing in the answer choices,
   so it’s testing sentence structure. If the main verb is in the wrong form,
   the sentence won’t be complete. The subject of the clause is which, but
   the clause has no verb, so the verb in the answers must be the main
   verb of the clause. Eliminate any answer that does not produce a
   complete sentence.

        (A) and (C) are wrong because an -ing verb can’t be the main verb
        in a sentence.

        (B) is wrong because a “to” verb can’t be the main verb in a
        sentence.

        (D) is correct because it’s in the right form to make a complete
        sentence.

18. B

   In this Rules question, pronouns and apostrophes are changing in the
   answer choices, so it’s testing consistency with pronouns. Find and
   highlight the word that the pronoun refers back to: activists. This is
   plural, so in order to be consistent, a plural pronoun is needed. Make
   an annotation saying “plural.” Eliminate any answer that isn’t consistent
   with activists or is incorrectly punctuated.
        (A) and (C) are wrong because its is singular.

        (B) is correct because their is plural and possessive.

        (D) is wrong because they’re means “they are.”

19. D

   In this Rules question, pronouns are changing in the answer choices, so
   it’s testing consistency with pronouns. Find and highlight the word the
   pronoun refers back to, people, which is plural, so a plural pronoun is
   needed. Write an annotation saying “plural.” Eliminate any answer that
   isn’t consistent with people.

        (A) and (B) are wrong because they are singular.

        (C) is wrong because you is not appropriate to refer to people in
        this context.

        (D) is correct because them is plural and is consistent with people.

20. D

   In this Rules question, punctuation is changing in the answer choices, so
   look for independent clauses. The first part of the sentence says
   National flags are designed to best represent and symbolize the
   individual country, which is an independent clause. The second part of
   the sentence says when countries share a history or culture, their
   flags are designed to look similar…, which is also an independent
   clause. Eliminate any answer that can’t correctly connect two
   independent clauses.

        (A) and (B) are wrong because neither a comma by itself nor a
        coordinating conjunction by itself can connect two independent
        clauses.
        (C) is wrong because it creates a run-on sentence.

        (D) is correct because a comma + a coordinating conjunction
        (FANBOYS) can connect two independent clauses.

21. A

   In this Rules question, periods and question marks are changing in the
   answer choices, so it’s testing questions versus statements. The last
   sentence says The scientists resolved to find out, which suggests that
   the previous sentence was a question. Eliminate answers that aren’t
   correctly written as questions.

        (A) is correct because it’s correctly written as a question.

        (B) is wrong because it has a question mark but is written as a
        statement.

        (C) and (D) are wrong because they are statements.

22. D

   In this Rules question, verbs are changing in the answer choices, so it’s
   testing consistency with verbs. Find and highlight the subject,
   shadowing, which is singular, so a singular verb is needed. Write an
   annotation saying “singular.” Eliminate any answer that is not singular.

        (A), (B), and (C) are wrong because they are plural.

        (D) is correct because it’s singular.

23. C

   In this Rules question, verbs are changing in the answer choices, so it’s
   testing consistency with verbs. In this case, the verb is part of a list of
   two things that the beach does, the first of which is allows community
   members to connect with the natural world. Highlight the word
   allows, which the verb in the answer should be consistent with.
   Eliminate any answer that isn’t consistent with allows.

        (A), (B), and (D) are wrong because provided, providing, and
        provide aren’t consistent with allows.

        (C) is correct because provides is in the same tense and form as
        allows.

24. D

   This is a transition question, so follow the basic approach. Highlight
   ideas that relate to each other. The first sentence says Yoga is an
   ancient discipline that…has expanded to become popular with many
   different cultures, and the next sentence says yoga is shifting into
   different forms to allow a wider range of people to participate. These
   ideas agree, so a same-direction transition is needed. Make an
   annotation that says “agree.” Eliminate any answer that doesn’t match.

        (A) is wrong because it is an opposite-direction transition.

        (B) is wrong because the second sentence is not about a separate but
        similar topic.

        (C) is wrong because thus indicates a conclusion.

        (D) is correct because currently suggests a change, which is
        consistent with yoga is shifting.

25. C

   This is a transition question, so follow the basic approach. Highlight
   ideas that relate to each other. The first sentence says Scientists often
   disagree about what traits to use to place newly discovered species in
   the tree of life, and the second sentence describes a species that is
   sometimes placed near modern spiders based on its acquisition of
   silk-spinning organs or near other arachnids based on its loss of a
   tail. These ideas agree, so a same-direction transition is needed. Make
   an annotation that says “agree.” Eliminate any answer that doesn’t
   match.

        (A) is wrong because as a result suggests a conclusion that is not
        stated in the text.

        (B) and (D) are wrong because they are opposite-direction
        transitions.

        (C) is correct because Chimerarachne yingi is an example of the
        previous sentence.

26. A

   This is a transition question, so follow the basic approach. Highlight
   ideas that relate to each other. The first sentence says that the
   seismometer’s detection potentially avoided mass architectural
   damage, and the second sentence says the cut to the power prevented
   citizens from being caught in a dangerous location during the
   earthquake and allowed riders to seek shelter. These ideas agree, so a
   same-direction transition is needed. Make an annotation that says
   “agree.” Eliminate any answer that doesn’t match.

        (A) is correct because allowing riders to seek shelter is another
        way the cut to power was beneficial.

        (B) is wrong because it is an opposite-direction transition.

        (C) and (D) are wrong because the second sentence is an additional
        point, not an example or specification.
27. A

     This is a Rhetorical Synthesis question, so follow the basic approach.
     Highlight the goal(s) stated in the question: make a generalization
     about the kind of study conducted by Eberhard, Wilcove, and Dobson.
     Eliminate any answer that doesn’t make a generalization.

         (A) is correct because it provides a generalization about the kind
         of study conducted by the scientists: analyzing population trends to
         find out the impact of legal protections.

         (B), (C), and (D) are wrong because they don’t provide a
         generalization or a broader way of explaining the type of study.

Module 2—Harder
1.   C

     This is a Vocabulary question, as it’s asking for a logical and precise
     word or phrase for the blank. Read the text and highlight what can help
     fill in the blank. The text states that all things, living or not, have the
     inclination to exist and enhance themselves. A good word or phrase
     for the annotation box based on this information would be “exist” or
     “hold on.”

         (A), (B), and (D) are wrong because deteriorate, perish, and
         disappear are the Opposite of “exist” or “hold on.”

         (C) is correct because persevere matches with “exist” or “hold on.”

2.   B

     This is a Vocabulary question, as it’s asking for a logical and precise
     word or phrase for the blank. Read the text and highlight what can help
     fill in the blank. The text states that the birds’ behavior in the study
     made it more difficult for the researchers to obtain data. A good word
     for the annotation box based on this information would be “hindered.”

         (A) and (C) are wrong because aided and clarified are the
         Opposite of “hindered.”

         (B) is correct because impeded matches “hindered.”

         (D) is wrong because exposed doesn’t match “hindered.”

3.   C

     This is a Vocabulary question, as it’s asking for a logical and precise
     word or phrase for the blank. Read the text and highlight what can help
     fill in the blank. The text states that the objects that M.C. Escher creates
     first appear normal but on closer inspection are, in fact, impossible.
     A good phrase for the annotation box based on this information would
     be “confusing objects.”

         (A), (B), and (D) are wrong because geometry, beauty, and color
         don’t match “confusing objects.”

         (C) is correct because paradox best matches “confusing objects.”

4.   D

     This is a Vocabulary question, as it’s asking for a logical and precise
     word or phrase for the blank. Read the text and highlight what can help
     fill in the blank. The text states that When microdroplets of water hit a
     solid surface, an electric charge produces hydroxyl radicals that in
     turn combine with remaining oxygen to form hydrogen peroxide. This
     information describes a chain of events started by water, so a good
     phrase for the annotation box would be “likely to trigger something.”
         (A), (B), and (C) are wrong because viable, contaminated, and
         common don’t match “likely to trigger something.”

         (D) is correct because reactive matches “likely to trigger
         something.”

5.   A

     This is a Vocabulary question, as it’s asking for a logical and precise
     word or phrase for the blank. Read the text and highlight what can help
     fill in the blank. The text states that The Beat Generation had a central
     message of nonconformity, meaning that they would reject the
     traditional values of the 1950s. A good word for the annotation box
     based on this information would be “rejection of.”

         (A) is correct because dissension from matches “rejection of.”

         (B), (C), and (D) are wrong because gratitude, adherence, and
         deference all imply a positive attitude toward or at least an
         acknowledgment of traditional values, which is the Opposite of
         “rejection of.”

6.   C

     This is a Vocabulary question, as it’s asking for a logical and precise
     word or phrase for the blank. Read the text and highlight what can help
     fill in the blank. In regard to recycling used car tires, the text states
     potentially reusing them would be beneficial and that walls made of
     used tires and dirt are structurally robust, or strong. A good word for
     the annotation box based on this information would be that the author
     considers the possibility of recycling used car tires as building
     materials to be “promising.”

         (A) and (B) are wrong because both derivative and ludicrous are
         negative words that are the Opposite tone of “promising.”
         (C) is correct because auspicious matches with “promising.”

         (D) is wrong because innovative is a Could Be True trap answer:
         the text doesn’t actually say reusing tires as the text describes would
         be a new idea or has not been done before.

7.   A

     This is a Vocabulary question, as it’s asking for a logical and precise
     word or phrase for the blank. Read the text and highlight what can help
     fill in the blank. The text states that cryptographers have yet to
     demonstrably decipher any portion of the text, so a good word for the
     annotation box to describe the meaning and purpose of the Voynich
     manuscript would be “mysterious.”

         (A) is correct because enigmatic matches “mysterious.”

         (B) and (D) are wrong because venerable and coherent don’t match
         “mysterious.”

         (C) is wrong because it is a Could Be True trap answer. While
         multifarious, or complex, things can be mysterious, the words are
         not synonyms: mysterious things can be simple, and complex things
         can be quite well known and understood.

8.   D

     This is a Vocabulary question, as it’s asking for a logical and precise
     word or phrase for the blank. Read the text and highlight what can help
     fill in the blank. The text describes Whitsett’s ground-breaking
     development and states that astronautics owes much to him. A good
     word for the annotation box based off this information would be
     “innovative.”
         (A) and (B) are wrong because dubious (doubtful) and futile
         (hopeless) are the Opposite tone of “innovative.”

         (C) is wrong because galvanizing, which means “stimulating,”
         doesn’t match “innovative.”

         (D) is correct because avant-garde means “pioneering,” which
         matches “innovative.”

9.   A

     This is a Retrieval question, as it says Based on the text. Read the text
     and highlight what is said about Mr. Lorry in his interaction with Miss
     Manette. Mr. Lorry states that he is a man of business and not much
     else before telling Miss Manette he wants to tell her a story. After her
     repetition of the word story, the text states that He seemed willfully to
     mistake the word she had repeated and acts as if she had repeated the
     word customers instead of story. The correct answer should be as
     consistent with these two descriptions of Mr. Lorry as possible.

         (A) is correct because it is consistent with the description of Mr.
         Lorry before and after Miss Manette’s reply.

         (B) and (C) are wrong because they are Half-Right: In (B), Mr.
         Lorry does not misunderstand Miss Manette’s interjection; he
         intentionally focuses on a different word. Similarly, in (C), it’s
         never stated that he cannot keep the details of the story accurate.

         (D) is wrong because the text never indicates that Miss Manette is
         rude, nor does it state that Mr. Lorry is unthinking in his actions.

10. B

     This is a Claims question, as it asks what finding would support a
     claim. Read the text and highlight the claim made, which is that Abel
   claims that his use of Barbeau’s text shows how anthropological texts
   can be used to portray Indigenous people differently based on the
   author.

        (A), (C), and (D) are wrong because they do not contain different
        portrayals of Indigenous peoples.

        (B) is correct because it focuses on one anthropologist, Marius
        Barbeau, choosing to portray the chiefs’ feud over constructing the
        largest pole as unreasonable, while the other anthropologists offer
        a reason as to why larger totem poles may have been culturally
        important to a tribe.

11. B

   This is a Claims question, as it asks for an illustration of a claim. Read
   the text and highlight the claim made, which is that While adult
   adoption remains a way for individuals to improve their economic
   status, the practice has its detractors as well, with some researchers
   arguing that it can lead to issues with the adoptee developing a firm
   sense of identity in his or her new environment. The correct answer
   should be consistent with this claim and support both the positive and
   negative viewpoints towards adult adoption.

        (A) and (D) are wrong because they are Half-Right: both express
        positive opinions toward adult adoptees but fail to account for the
        negative opinions towards adult adoption stated in the second half
        of the text.

        (B) is correct because it is consistent with both the positive and
        negative outcomes of adult adoption discussed in the claim.

        (C) is wrong because the distinction made in the text is between
        positive and negative outcomes of adult adoption, not the status of
        adult adoption in different East Asian countries.

12. A

   This is a Claims question, as it asks for support for a hypothesis. Read
   the text and highlight the hypothesis, which states that tau protein, the
   mutation of which is known to cause Alzheimer’s disease, is key to
   controlling glutamate receptors. It’s also important to note the last
   sentence, which clarifies that Tau protein does not directly affect
   glutamate receptors but does inhibit NSF. The correct answer should
   be consistent with these two sentences.

        (A) is correct because if an excess of NSF has been shown to lead
        to abnormal glutamate receptor behavior, and tau protein…does
        inhibit NSF, this would support the link made between tau proteins
        and glutamate receptors made in the hypothesis.

        (B) and (D) are wrong because even if true, they either disregard or
        do not mention tau protein and glutamate receptors, the main
        components of the hypothesis.

        (C) is wrong because the hypothesis is not about what causes
        mutations of tau protein, but how tau protein controls glutamate
        receptors.

13. A

   This is a Claims question, as it asks for support for an argument. Read
   the text and highlight Garber’s argument, which states that tulip mania
   is explainable by fundamental economic concepts such as supply and
   demand. The correct answer will be as consistent as possible with this
   claim.

        (A) is correct because it discusses supply and demand, which is
        consistent with Garber’s claim.
        (B) and (C) are wrong because even though they focus on the price
        of tulip bulbs, they don’t discuss supply and demand.

        (D) is wrong because Garber’s argument does not mention any
        connection between tulip bulbs and the supply of gold coins in the
        Dutch republic.

14. A

   This is a Conclusions question as it asks for an answer that logically
   completes the text. Read the text and highlight the main ideas. The
   focus of the text is on the use of ants to control pests. The third
   sentence identifies several positive effects, but the last sentence
   mentions that ants also have negative effects. Therefore, a logical
   conclusion to the text should expand upon the negative effects
   introduced in the final sentence.

        (A) is correct because it references unintended environmental
        consequences, which relate back to the negative effects described in
        the first half of the last sentence when ants are used to control pests.

        (B) and (D) are wrong because they do not focus on negative effects
        that ants may have as pest control.

        (C) is wrong because it is the Opposite of what the last sentence
        states: there are indeed ramifications, or negative effects, to using
        ants as pest control.

15. C

   This is a Conclusions question as it asks for an answer that logically
   completes the text. Read the text and highlight the main ideas. The
   focus of the text is on a receptor related to odor. The first sentence
   states that eliminating that receptor…results in the inability to smell
   that odor. The second sentence states that mosquitoes modified to lack
   the receptor for smelling blood would be unable to find humans, but
   the third sentence says they were still able to find humans. Therefore, a
   logical conclusion to the text should make some claim about how
   mosquitoes may be different from other animals.

        (A) is wrong because no comparison between mosquitoes without
        damage and those with damage is made in the text.

        (B) and (D) are wrong because they are the Opposite of what is
        stated in the text: in both cases, mosquitoes with damage to their
        odor receptors were still able to find humans, so there is no
        evidence they could not detect certain odors or would be prevented
        from feeding.

        (C) is correct because it indicates that mosquitoes may not have the
        same correlation between receptors and the ability to sense
        certain odors that other animals do.

16. A

   This is a Conclusions question as it asks for an answer that logically
   completes the text. Read the text and highlight the main ideas. The
   focus of the text is on NAFTA and its relation to manufacturing jobs.
   During the interval from 1994 to 2020, the second sentence states that
   the number of manufacturing jobs in the United States and Canada
   declined, but the total number of manufacturing jobs in the countries
   covered by NAFTA increased. Therefore, a logical conclusion would
   explain how this might be possible.

        (A) is correct because if an increase in the number of
        manufacturing jobs in Mexico, which is also covered by NAFTA,
        was greater than the combined decreases in the United States and
        Canada, this would explain the seemingly contradictory data in the
        second sentence.
        (B), (C), and (D) are wrong because none of them offers a reason as
        to how the number of manufacturing jobs in the United States and
        Canada declined, but the total number of manufacturing jobs in all
        three countries increased.

17. C

   In this Rules question, verbs are changing in the answer choices, so it’s
   testing consistency with verbs. Find and highlight the subject, cloud,
   which is singular, so a singular verb is needed. Write an annotation
   saying “singular.” Eliminate any answer that is not singular.

        (A), (B), and (D) are wrong because they are plural.

        (C) is correct because it’s singular.

18. B

   In this Rules question, punctuation is changing in the answer choices.
   The words behavioral neuroscientist are a title for Damien Fair, so
   no punctuation should be used. Eliminate answers that use punctuation.

        (A), (C), and (D) are wrong because a comma isn’t used before or
        after a title.

        (B) is correct because titles before names have no punctuation

19. A

   In this Rules question, verbs are changing in the answer choices, so it’s
   testing consistency with verbs. Find and highlight the subject, map,
   which is singular, so a singular verb is needed. Write an annotation
   saying “singular.” Eliminate any answer that is not singular.

        (A) is correct because it’s singular.
        (B), (C), and (D) are wrong because they are plural.

20. A

   In this Rules question, punctuation is changing in the answer choices.
   The words common insecticide are a title for sulfoxaflor, so no
   punctuation should be used. Eliminate answers that use punctuation.

        (A) is correct because titles before names have no punctuation.

        (B), (C), and (D) are wrong because a comma isn’t used before or
        after a title.

21. D

   In this Rules question, punctuation with a transition is changing in the
   answer choices. Look for independent clauses. The first part of the
   sentence says Wichman’s work to preserve the culture of Kaua’i
   wasn’t finished. There is an option to add though to this independent
   clause, and since it’s contrasting with the previous idea, the transition
   should be added. Eliminate options that don’t have though in the first
   part.

        (A) and (C) are wrong because they create a run-on sentence.

        (B) is wrong because it puts Though with the second independent
        clause.

        (D) is correct because though is part of the first independent clause.

22. D

   In this Rules question, punctuation is changing in the answer choices, so
   look for independent clauses. The first part of the sentence says
   Researchers studying bacteria have solved a 50-year mystery of how
   bacteria are able to move using appendages that are made of a single
   protein, which is an independent clause. The second part of the
   sentence says the subunits of the protein can exist in 11 different
   shapes…, which is also an independent clause. Eliminate any answer
   that can’t correctly connect two independent clauses.

        (A) and (C) are wrong because two independent clauses can’t be
        linked with a comma by itself or with no punctuation at all.

        (B) is wrong because while is used for a contrast or for
        simultaneous events, which isn’t the case here.

        (D) is correct because a colon can connect two independent clauses
        and is appropriately used when the second part explains the first.

23. A

   This is a transition question, so follow the basic approach. Highlight
   ideas that relate to each other. The first part of the sentence says Fault
   tree analysis was originally used…in high-risk fields…but other
   fields are experimenting with using it, and the second part of the
   sentence says fault tree analysis is also being used in low-risk fields.
   These ideas agree, so a same-direction transition is needed. Make an
   annotation that says “agree.” Eliminate any answer that doesn’t match.

        (A) is correct because increasingly supports the change from fault
        tree analysis’s original use to where it is begun to be used.

        (B) is wrong because it is an opposite-direction transition.

        (C) is wrong because the second sentence isn’t a conclusion.

        (D) is wrong because the second sentence isn’t an additional point.

24. C
   This is a transition question, so follow the basic approach. Highlight
   ideas that relate to each other. The first part of the sentence says she
   had primarily worked on canvas, and the second part of the sentence
   says but she quickly found her works evolving to include the three-
   dimensional space around her. These ideas disagree, so an opposite-
   direction transition is needed. Make an annotation that says “disagree.”
   Eliminate any answer that doesn’t match.

        (A) is wrong because instead implies that the contrast is between
        the first and second sentence, but the contrast is between the two
        parts of the sentence.

        (B) and (D) are wrong because they are same-direction transitions.

        (C) is correct because previously is opposite-direction and supports
        the shift described in the sentence.

25. D

   This is a transition question, so follow the basic approach. Highlight
   ideas that relate to each other. The previous sentence says Some
   scientists believe that the fish are carried to these locations in the
   beaks or talons of birds, and this sentence describes what new
   research suggests as a different way the fish travel. These ideas
   disagree, so an opposite-direction transition is needed. Make an
   annotation that says “disagree.” Eliminate any answer that doesn’t
   match.

        (A), (B), and (C) are wrong because they are same-direction
        transitions.

        (D) is correct because alternatively is an opposite-direction
        transition.

26. D
     This is a Rhetorical Synthesis question, so follow the basic approach.
     Highlight the goal(s) stated in the question: emphasize the aim of the
     research study. Eliminate any answer that doesn’t fulfill this purpose.

         (A), (B), and (C) are wrong because they don’t mention the aim of
         the research study—what researchers wanted to accomplish.

         (D) is correct because it mentions the aim of the research study by
         stating what researchers wanted to know.

27. B

     This is a Rhetorical Synthesis question, so follow the basic approach.
     Highlight the goal(s) stated in the question: emphasize the affiliation
     and purpose of Pääbo’s and Skov’s work. Eliminate any answer that
     doesn’t fulfill this purpose.

         (A), (C), and (D) are wrong because they don’t mention the
         affiliation—the group or institution the scientists are associated
         with.

         (B) is correct because it states the affiliation (Max Planck Institute
         for Evolutionary Anthropology) and purpose (provide insight into
         human evolution).


PRACTICE TEST 1—MATH EXPLANATIONS
Module 1
1.   B

     The question asks for the frequency table that correctly represents a list
     of numbers. A frequency table has two columns: the left-hand column
     contains the values, and the right-hand column contains the number of
     times each value occurs, or its frequency. Work in bite-sized pieces and
     eliminate answer choices that do not match the data. The number 2
     occurs twice in the list, so its frequency is 2. Eliminate (A) because it
     shows a frequency of 4 for the number 2. Eliminate (D) because it does
     not include the number 2 at all. Next, the number 9 occurs three times in
     the list, so its frequency is 3. Eliminate (C) because it shows the
     number 3 occurring 9 times instead of the number 9 occurring 3 times.
     Choice (B) shows the correct frequency for each value. The correct
     answer is (B).

2.   C

     The question asks for an equivalent form of an expression. When given
     a quadratic in standard form, which is ax2 + bx + c, one approach is to
     factor it. Find two numbers that multiply to 56 and add to –1. These are
     –8 and 7, so the factored form of the quadratic is (x – 8)(x + 7), which
     is (C). When a quadratic is more difficult to factor than this one was,
     another approach is to use a graphing calculator. Enter the expression
     given in the question, then enter the expressions from the answer
     choices one at a time and stop when one of the answers produces the
     same graph. Using either method, the correct answer is (C).

3.   C

     The question asks for an equation that represents a specific situation.
     Translate the information in bite-sized pieces and eliminate after each
     piece. One piece of information says that the carpenter hammers 10
     nails per minute, and another piece says that the carpenter hammers

     nails for x minutes. Multiplying the rate of 10 nails per minute by the
     number of minutes gives the number of nails:
                                              . Eliminate (A) and (B) because

     they multiply the number of minutes by      instead of by 10. Compare

     the remaining answer choices. The difference between (C) and (D) is
     the number on the right side of the equation. Since the carpenter uses a
     combined total of 200 nails and screws, the equation must equal 200.
     Eliminate (D) because it equals 3,420. The correct answer is (C).

4.   B

     The question asks for the value of the measure of an angle on a figure.
     Use the Geometry Basic Approach. Start by drawing a triangle on the
     scratch paper. Then label the figure with the given information. Label
     angle D as 73°, angle E as 35°, and angle F without a number. Since the
     measures of the angles in a triangle have a sum of 180°, set up the
     equation 73° + 35° + F = 180°, which becomes 108° + F = 180°.
     Subtract 108° from both sides of the equation to get F = 72°. The
     correct answer is (B).

5.   D

     The question asks about a graph representing a certain situation. In a
     linear graph that represents an amount over time, the y-intercept
     represents the initial amount. In this case, it represents the amount of
     plastic remaining to be recycled when x = 0. After 0 shifts, no plastic
     has been recycled yet, so the y-intercept represents the initial amount of
     plastic to be recycled. The answer is (D).

6.       or 0.6
     The question asks for a probability based on data in a table. Probability

     is defined as                                    . Read the table carefully

     to find the numbers to make the probability. There are 200 total
     textbooks, so that is the total # of outcomes. Of these 200 textbooks,
     120 are new textbooks, so that is the # of outcomes that fit
     requirements. Therefore, the probability that a textbook chosen at

     random is a new textbook is       . This cannot be entered into the fill-in

     box, which only accepts 5 characters when the answer is positive. All
     equivalent answers that fit will be accepted, so reduce the fraction or

     convert it to a decimal. The correct answer is      , 0.6, or another

     equivalent form.

7.   D

     The question asks for a reasonable number based on survey results and

     a margin of error. Work in bite-sized pieces and eliminate after each
     piece. A margin of error expresses the amount of random sampling
     error in a survey’s results. Start by applying the percent of respondents
     who did not support the existing registration system to the entire
     population of undergraduate students. Take 75% of the entire

     undergraduate student population to get                            students.

     Eliminate (A) and (B) because they are not close to this value and do
     not represent a reasonable number of students who did not support the
     existing registration system. The margin of error is 4%, meaning that

     results within a range of 4% above and 4% below the estimate are
     reasonable. A 4% margin of error will not change the result by very
     much, and (D) is the only answer choice close to 45,000. To check,
     calculate the lower limit of the range based on the margin of error,
     since 43,800 is less than 45,000. To find the lower limit, subtract 4%
     from 75% to get 71%, then find 71% of the total population to get a

     lower limit of                        . The value in (C) is less than the

     lower limit, so it is not a reasonable number. Choice (D) contains a
     value between 42,600 and 45,000, so it is reasonable. The correct
     answer is (D).

8.   –4

     The question asks for a solution to an equation. To begin solving for a,
     multiply both sides of the equation by a to get 32 = a(a – 4). Next,
     distribute on the right side of the equation to get 32 = a2 – 4a. Subtract
     32 from both sides of the equation to get 0 = a2 – 4a – 32. Now that the
     equation is a quadratic in standard form, which is ax2 + bx + c, factor it
     to find the solutions. Find two numbers that multiply to –32 and add to
     –4. These are 4 and –8, so the factored form of the quadratic is 0 = (a +
     4)(a – 8). Now set each factor equal to 0 to get two equations: a + 4 =
     0 and a – 8 = 0. Subtract 4 from both sides of the first equation to get a
     = –4. Add 8 to both sides of the second equation to get a = 8.
     Therefore, the negative solution to the given equation is –4. It is also
     possible to enter the equation into a graphing calculator—using x as the
     variable—then scroll and zoom as needed to find the x-intercept with a
     negative value. Using either method, the correct answer is –4.

9.   A

     The question asks for a description of a function that models a specific
     situation. Compare the answer choices. Two choices say the function is
     increasing, and two say it is decreasing. Since the balloon is rising, its
     distance above sea level is increasing over time. Eliminate (C) and (D)
     because they describe a decreasing function. The difference between
     (A) and (B) is whether the function is linear or exponential. Since the
     distance above sea level changes by a constant amount during each unit
     of time, the relationship between the balloon’s distance above sea level
     and time is linear. Eliminate (B) because it describes an exponential
     function. The correct answer is (A).

10. B

     The question asks for the x-intercept of a function. An x-intercept is a
     point where y = 0. In function notation, f(x) = y. The number inside the
     parentheses is the x-value that goes into the function, or the input, and
     the value that comes out of the function is the y-value, or the output.
     Together, they represent points on the graph of the function. The
     answers are points that could be the x-intercept, so plug in the answers.
     Start with (A), and plug x = –1 and y = 0 into the function, keeping in
     mind that f(x) = y. The equation becomes 0 = (22)–1 – 1. Add 1 to both
     sides of the equation to get 1 = (22)–1. Either use a calculator or know
   how to work with a negative exponent. A negative exponent means to
   raise the value to the positive exponent and take the reciprocal, so

   (22)–1 becomes       . The equation then becomes           . This is not

   true, so eliminate (A). Next, try (B) and plug x = 0 and y = 0 into the
   function to get 0 = (22)0 – 1. Add 1 to both sides of the equation to get
   1 = (22)0. Any number raised to the power of 0 is 1, so the equation
   becomes 1 = 1. This is true, so stop here. The correct answer is (B).

11. A

   The question asks for the length of a side of a geometric figure. Use the
   Geometry Basic Approach. Start by redrawing the figure on the scratch
   paper, then label it with information from the question. Since the
   question asks for a specific value and the answers contain numbers in
   increasing order, plug in the answers. Write the answers on the scratch
   paper, label them as “side AB,” and start with a middle number. Try (B)
   and make AB = 16. The question states that the length of AB is one-
   third the length of AD. Given this, if AB = 16, AD = 3(16) = 48. The
   perimeter of a geometric shape is the sum of the lengths of the sides, so
   the perimeter of this figure is 16 + 48 + 16 + 48 = 128. This does not
   match the perimeter of 64 given in the question, so eliminate (B). The
   result was too big, and a longer side length will make the perimeter
   even bigger, so eliminate (C) and (D), as well. The correct answer is
   (A).

12. A

   The question asks for a value based on a geometric figure. Use the
   Geometry Basic Approach. Start by drawing a triangle on the scratch
   paper, then label the figure with the given information. The question
   gives the area of the triangle, so write out the formula for the area of a

   triangle,         , and plug in the given area to get            . Since the

   question asks for a specific value and the answers contain numbers in
   increasing order, plug in the answers. Write the answers on the scratch
   paper, label them as “m,” and start with a middle number. Try (B), 9. If
   m = 9, the base of the triangle is 9 + 5 = 14, and the height of the
   triangle is 9. Plug these numbers into the area formula to get

                 . Simplify the right side of the equation to get 18 = 63.

   This is not true, so eliminate (B). The result was too big, and a larger
   value of m will make the area even bigger, so eliminate (C) and (D), as
   well. The correct answer is (A).

13. D

   The question asks for the equation that represents the relationship
   between two variables. When given a table of values and asked for the
   correct equation, plug values from the table into the answer choices to
   see which one works. According to the table, s = 2 when c = 80.
   Choice (A) becomes 80 = (1 + 3)2, or 80 = 42, then 80 = 16. This is not
   true, so eliminate (A). Choice (B) becomes 80 = (1 + 5)2, or 80 = 62,
   then 80 = 36; eliminate (B). Choice (C) becomes 80 = 3(1 + 5)2, or 80
   = 3(6)2, then 80 = 3(36), then 80 = 108; eliminate (C). Choice (D)
   becomes 80 = 5(1 + 3)2, or 80 = 5(4)2, then 80 = 5(16), then 80 = 80.
   This is true, so keep (D). The correct answer is (D).
14. A

   The question asks for the number of points of intersection in a system of
   equations. One method is to use a graphing calculator. Enter both
   equations into the calculator, then scroll and zoom to see where, if at
   all, they intersect. The lines appear to be parallel and do not intersect.
   To solve algebraically, substitute 12x for y in the second equation to get
   24x + 7 = 2(12x). Simplify the right side of the equation to get 24x + 7
   = 24x. Subtract 24x from both sides of the equation to get 7 = 0. This is
   not true, so the system of equations has no solution. This means the
   lines are parallel and do not intersect. Using either method, the correct
   answer is (A).

15. 25

   The question asks for a value given a specific situation. Translate the
   information in bite-sized pieces. The question states that the equation
   15a + 10b = 100 represents the situation when a of the A tiles and b
   of the B tiles are drawn for a total of 100 points. Since the sum of 15a
   and 10b is the number of points, and a and b are numbers of tiles, 15
   and 10 must be the point values of one A tile and one B tile,
   respectively. To find the number of points earned by drawing 1 of each
   type of tile, plug in 1 for a and 1 for b to get 15(1) + 10(1) = 15 + 10 =
   25. The correct answer is 25.

16. D

   The question asks for an equation that represents a specific situation.
   The value of the fund is decreasing by a certain fraction over time, so

   this question is about exponential decay. Knowing the parts of the
   growth and decay formula can help with this question. That formula is
   final amount = (original amount)(1 ± rate)number of changes. In this
   case, d is the final amount, and the question states that the original
   amount was $10,000. Eliminate (A) and (B) because they do not have
   10,000 as the original amount in front of the parentheses. Since this
   situation involves a decrease, the original amount must be multiplied by

   (1 − rate), and the rate here is , so the value in parentheses should be

         or . Eliminate (C), which does not have this rate. The only

   remaining answer is (D), and it matches the growth formula. Without

   this formula, it is still possible to answer this question. Plug in a value
   of y to see how the fund amount decreases over time. After 1 year, the

   fund will have    less than the initial $10,000. The value of the account

   will then be                                                             .

   After another year, the fund will have     less than $7,500, so the value

   will be                                                      . Plug y = 2

   into the answer choices to see which gives a value of 5,625 for d. Only
   (D) works. Using either method, the correct answer is (D).

17. C

   The question asks for the measurement of part of a geometric figure.
   Use the Geometry Basic Approach. Start by drawing a cylinder on the
   scratch paper, then label the figure with the given information. Look up
   the formula for the volume of a cylinder on the online reference sheet
   and write it down: V = πr2h. Plug in the values given in the question for
   the volume and the height to get 144π = πr2(4). Divide both sides of the
   equation by 4π to get 36 = r2. Take the square root of both sides of the
   equation to get 6 = r. Be careful, and read the final question, which
   asks for the diameter, not the radius. The diameter of a circle is twice
   the radius, so d = 2(6), or d = 12. The correct answer is (C).

18. C

   The question asks for the value of the x-coordinate of the solution to a
   system of equations. The quickest method is to enter both equations into
   a graphing calculator, then scroll and zoom as needed to find the point
   of intersection. The point is (6, –10), so the x-coordinate, or a, is 6. To
   solve the system for the x-coordinate algebraically, find a way to make
   the y-coordinates disappear when stacking and adding the equations.
   Compare the y-terms: the larger coefficient, 10, is 5 times the smaller
   one, 2. Multiply the entire first equation by –5 to get the same
   coefficient with opposite signs on the y terms. The first equation
   becomes –5(4x + 2y) = –5(4) and then –20x – 10y = –20. Now stack
   and add the two equations.




   Divide both sides of the resulting equation by –1 to get x = 6. Using
   either method, the correct answer is (C).

 19.

   The question asks for the value of a trigonometric function. Use the
   Geometry Basic Approach. Begin by drawing a triangle and labeling
   the vertices. The largest angle in a right triangle is the 90° angle, and
the largest angle is opposite the longest side, so label angle B as a right
angle. The drawing should look something like this:




Next, write out SOHCAHTOA to remember the trig functions. The

SOH part defines the sine as              , and the question states that

            , so label the side opposite angle A, which is BC, as 9 and

the hypotenuse, which is AC, as 41. To find the length of the third side,
use Pythagorean Theorem: a2 + b2 = c2. Plug in the known values to get
92 + b2 = 412. Square the numbers to get 81 + b2 = 1,681, then subtract
81 from both sides of the equation to get b2 = 1,600. Take the square
root of both sides of the equation to get b = 40.

With all three side lengths labeled, the drawing looks like this:




To find sin(C), use the SOH part of SOHCAHTOA again. The side

opposite angle C is 40, and the hypotenuse is 41, so                . On

fill-in questions, a fractional answer can also be entered as a decimal.
    When the answer is positive, there is room in the fill-in box for five

    characters, including the decimal point. In this case               , which

    is too long. Either stop when there’s no more room and enter .9756 or
    round the last digit, which in this case is also .9756. It is allowed but
    not required to put a 0 in front of the decimal point, which would make
    the answer 0.975 or 0.976, but do not shorten it more than that. The

    correct answer is      or equivalent forms.

20. –2.5

    The question asks for the value when a quadratic function reaches its
    maximum. A parabola reaches its minimum or maximum value at its
    vertex, so find the x-coordinate of the vertex. One method is to enter the
    equation into a graphing calculator, then scroll and zoom as needed to
    find the vertex. The vertex is at (–2.5, 13.5), so the value of the x-

    coordinate is –2.5. To solve algebraically, find the value of h, which is
    the x-coordinate of the vertex (h, k). The equation is in standard form,

    ax2 + bx + c, in which           . Since a = –6 and b = –30,                .

    This becomes              , and then h = –2.5. Using either method, the

    correct answer is –2.5.

21. 10
    The question asks for the value of a function. The question states that
    the graph of function f and the graph of function g are perpendicular
    lines, which means they have slopes that are negative reciprocals of

    each other. The question gives the equation of line f, so find the slope
    of that line. This function is in the form y = mx + b, in which m is the

    slope and b is the y-intercept, so the slope of line f is   . The negative

    reciprocal of     is 5, so the slope of line g is 5. In function notation,

    the number inside the parentheses is the x-value that goes into the
    function, or the input, and the value that comes out of the function is the
    y-value, or the output. Together, they represent points on the graph of
    the function. Thus, if g(0) = 0, that means line g contains the point (0,
    0). Plug this point into the y = mx + b equation to get 0 = 5(0) + b, or 0
    = b. Now plug x = 2, m = 5, and b = 0 into y = mx + b to get y = 5(2) +
    0, or y = 10. The correct answer is 10.

22. 2.4

    The question asks for a value in a system of equations. Start by
    simplifying the second equation by multiplying both sides of the
    equation by 10 to get y = –10x. Now that both equations are equal to y,
    set them equal to each other to get –10x = 5kx2 + 2x + 3. Add 10x to
    both sides of the equation to get 5kx2 + 12x + 3 = 0. The question states
    that the system has exactly one solution. To determine the number of
    solutions to a quadratic, use the discriminant. The discriminant is the
    part of the quadratic formula under the square root sign, and it can be
     written as D = b2 – 4ac. When the discriminant is positive, the
     quadratic has exactly two real solutions; when the discriminant is 0, the
     quadratic has exactly one real solution; and when the discriminant is
     negative, the quadratic has no real solutions. Since this quadratic has
     exactly one real solution, the discriminant must equal 0. The quadratic
     is now in standard form, ax2 + bx + c = 0, so a = 5k, b = 12, and c = 3.
     Plug these into the discriminant formula, along with D = 0, to get 0 =
     122 – 4(5k)(3), which becomes 0 = 144 – 60k. Add 60k to both sides of
     the equation to get 144 = 60k, then divide both sides of the equation by
     60 to get 2.4 = k. The correct answer is 2.4.

Module 2—Easier
1.   C

     The question asks for the median of a set of data. The median of a list
     of numbers is the middle number when the numbers are arranged in
     order. In lists with an even number of numbers, the median is the
     average of the two middle numbers. Count to see that there are 7
     numbers in the list. Since there is an odd number of numbers, the
     median is the middle number. Since this list is already in order, cross
     out one number at a time from each end until only the middle number is
     left, like so: 33, 34, 38, 41, 43, 44, 47. The middle number is 41, so the
     median is 41. The correct answer is (C).

2.   32

     The question asks for the value of a variable based on an equation.
     Isolate the variable by moving everything else to the other side of the
     equation. Since the right side of the equation has –10, add 10 to both
     sides of the equation. Write this step on the scratch paper like this:
     The correct answer is 32.

3.   B

     The question asks for the perimeter of a rectangle. Use the Geometry
     Basic Approach. Start by drawing a rectangle on the scratch paper.
     Next, label the figure with information from the question. In a rectangle,
     opposite sides are equal, so this rectangle has two sides that are 23
     inches long and two sides that are 9 inches long. The drawing should
     look something like this:




     The perimeter of a geometric shape is the sum of the lengths of the
     sides. Add all four side lengths to get 9 + 23 + 9 + 23 = 64. The correct
     answer is (B).

4.   C

     The question asks for an equivalent form of an expression. Every term
     includes the variable a multiplied by a different number, called a
     coefficient. Work with the coefficients, and remember the order of
     operations, PEMDAS, which stands for Parentheses, Exponents,
     Multiply, Divide, Add, Subtract. Start inside the parentheses: 6a – 2a =
     4a. The expression becomes 15a – 4a. Subtract the coefficients to get
     15a – 4a = 11a. The correct answer is (C).

5.   A
     The question asks for an equation that represents the relationship
     between two variables. Translate the English to math in bite-sized

     pieces. Translate is as equals, or =. Translate half as . Translate of as

     times, or ×. Thus, a is half of b translates to          . The

     multiplication sign is not needed when multiplying a number by a

     variable, so this can be written as           . The correct answer is (A).

6.   B

     The question asks for the value of a constant given two equivalent
     expressions. Start by rewriting the expressions with an equals sign

     between them to get                   . Next, start to solve by cross-

     multiplying. The equation becomes (y + c)(15) = (3)(5y + 30).
     Distribute on both sides of the equation to get 15y + 15c = 15y + 90.
     Subtract 15y from both sides of the equation to get 15c = 90. Divide
     both sides of the equation by 15 to get c = 6. The correct answer is (B).

7.   140

     The question asks for a value based on a percentage. Translate the
     English to math in bite-sized pieces. Percent means out of 100, so

     translate 70% as      . Translate how many as a variable, such as d for
     dogs. Translate of as times, or ×. Translate the pets as 200. The

     equation becomes                   . Solve the equation by hand or on a

     calculator to get d = 140. The correct answer is 140.

8.   A

     The question asks for a value given a rate. Begin by reading the
     question to find information about the rate. The question states that

     James drives at an average speed of 20 miles per hour. Set up a
     proportion to determine how many hours it will take James to drive

     100 miles. The proportion is                        . Cross-multiply to

     get (1)(100) = (20)(x), or 100 = 20x. Divide both sides of the equation
     by 20 to get 5 = x. The correct answer is (A).

9.   44

     The question asks for the value of an expression given an equation.
     When an SAT question asks for the value of an expression, there is
     usually a straightforward way to solve for the expression without
     needing to completely isolate the variable. Since 4y is four times y and
     16 is four times 4, multiply the entire equation by 4 to get (4)(y – 4) =
     (4)(11). The equation becomes 4y – 16 = 44. The correct answer is 44.

10. D

     The question asks for the value of a function. In function notation, f(x) =
     y. The number inside the parentheses is the x-value that goes into the
     function, or the input, and the value that comes out of the function is the
    y-value, or the output. The question provides an input value, so plug x =
    3 into the function to get g(3) = 32 – 1, which becomes g(3) = 9 – 1,
    and then g(3) = 8. The correct answer is (D).

11. D

    The question asks for the value of a function. In function notation, f(x) =
    y. The number inside the parentheses is the x-value that goes into the
    function, or the input, and the value that comes out of the function is the
    y-value, or the output. The question provides the number of items,
    which is represented by x, so plug x = 2,000 into the function to get
    p(2,000) = 2(2,000) + 150, which becomes p(2,000) = 4,000 + 150,
    and then p(2,000) = 4,150. The correct answer is (D).

12. B

    The question asks for the value of a function. In function notation, f(x) =
    y. The number inside the parentheses is the x-value that goes into the
    function, or the input, and the value that comes out of the function is the
    y-value, or the output. The question provides an input value, so plug x =

    6 into the function to get            , which becomes f(6) = 4. The

    correct answer is (B).

13. 118

    The question asks for the value of an angle on a figure. Use the
    Geometry Basic Approach. Start by redrawing the figure on the scratch
    paper, then label the figure with the given information. The fact that two
    of the lines are parallel will be important on some questions about
    lines and angles, but here it’s unnecessary information. Instead, since d
    and 62 make up a straight line and there are 180° in a line, d + 62 =
   180. Subtract 62 from both sides of the equation to get d = 118. The
   correct answer is 118.

14. A


   The question asks for the value of an expression given the equation of a

   graph in the xy-plane. One method is to use a graphing calculator. Enter


   the equation of the line, then scroll and zoom as needed to find the

   intercepts. The x-intercept is at (5.667, 0), and the y-intercept is at (0, –

   4.25). Thus, c = 5.667, k = –4.25, and                       . This is the

   same value as      , which matches (A). To solve algebraically, plug the

   given points into the equation of the line. Plug in x = c and y = 0 to get

   3c – 4(0) = 17, or 3c = 17. Divide both sides of the equation by 3 to get

         . Next, plug in x = 0 and y = k to get 3(0) – 4k = 17, or –4k = 17.

   Divide both sides of the equation by –4 to get            . Finally divide


   c by k to get          . When dividing fractions, multiply the reciprocal
   of the fraction in the denominator and the fraction in the numerator. This


   becomes                    , and then         . Using either method, the

   correct answer is (A).


15. D

   The question asks for a value given a rate. Begin by reading the
   question to find information about the rate. The question states that the
   machine processes mail at a constant rate of 21 piece of mail per
   minute. Set up a proportion to determine how many pieces of mail the
   machine will process in 7 minutes, being sure to match up units. The

   proportion is                                    . Cross-multiply to get

   (1)(x) = (21)(7), or x = 147. The correct answer is (D).

16. B

   The question asks for an equation that represents a specific situation.
   Translate the information in bite-sized pieces and eliminate after each
   piece. One piece of information says that Stella will send 24 invitations
   each day for the next d days. Since d represents the number of days, it
   should be multiplied by 24. Eliminate (C) and (D) because they
   multiply d by 43 instead of 24. Compare the remaining answer choices.
   The difference between (A) and (B) is whether 43 is added to 24d or
   subtracted from 24d. Since Stella has already sent 43 invitations and
   will send a total of 211 invitations, 43 should be added to 24d and set
   equal to 211. Eliminate (A) because it uses subtraction. The correct
   answer is (B).

17. B

   The question asks for the function that represents values given in a
   table. In function notation, the number inside the parentheses is the x-
   value that goes into the function, or the input, and the value that comes
   out of the function is the y-value, or the output. Together, they represent
   points on the graph of the function. The table shows pairs of values for
   x and f(x), and the correct function must work for every point on the
   graph. Plug in values from the table and eliminate functions that don’t
   work. Try the point (0, 15) and plug x = 0 and f(x) = 15 into the answer
   choices. Choice (A) becomes 15 = 3(0) + 12, or 15 = 12. This is not
   true, so eliminate (A). Choice (B) becomes 15 = 3(0) + 15, or 15 = 15.
   This is true, so keep (B), but check the remaining answers just in case.
   Choice (C) becomes 15 = 15(0) + 12, or 15 = 12; eliminate (C).
   Choice (D) becomes 15 = 15(0) + 15, or 15 = 15; keep (D). Two
   answers worked for the first point, so try a second point from the table
   and plug x = 1 and f(x) = 18 into the remaining answers. Choice (B)
   becomes 18 = 3(1) + 15, or 18 = 18; keep (B). Choice (D) becomes 18
   = 15(1) + 15, or 18 = 30; eliminate (D). The correct answer is (B).

18. C

   The question asks for the term in an equation that represents a specific
   part of a scenario. The question states that s represents the number of
   seconds since the rocket was launched and asks for the height when
   the rocket was launched. No time had elapsed at the instant the rocket
   was launched, so plug s = 0 into the equation. The equation becomes h
   = –16(0)2 + 64(0) + 21. Simplify the right side of the equation to get h
   = 0 + 0 + 21, or h = 21. Since the height at the time of 0 seconds is 21
   feet, that number represents the initial height, or the height of the
   rooftop. The correct answer is (C).
19. D

   The question asks for correct values in a function. In function notation,
   f(x) = y. The number inside the parentheses is the x-value that goes into
   the function, or the input, and the value that comes out of the function is
   the y-value, or the output. When given a function and asked for the table
   of values, plug values from the answer choices into the function and
   eliminate answers that don’t work. Start with x = 2 because two
   answers pair it with y = 3 and two pair it with y = 9, so this will
   eliminate half of the answer choices. Plug x = 2 into the function to get
   f(2) = 23 + 1, which becomes f(2) = 8 + 1, and then f(2) = 9. Eliminate
   (A) and (B) because they both have y = 3 for this x value. The third
   pair of values is the same in (C) and (D), so try the second pair of
   values and plug x = 3 into the function. The function becomes f(3) = 33
   + 1, then f(3) = 27 + 1, and then f(3) = 28. Eliminate (C). The correct
   answer is (D).

20. A

   The question asks for the equation that defines a function. In function
   notation, the number inside the parentheses is the x-value that goes into
   the function, or the input, and the value that comes out of the function is
   the y-value, or the output. The question provides two pairs of input and
   output values, so plug those into the answer choices and eliminate
   answers that don’t work with both pairs. Start by plugging x = –1 and
   h(x) = 3 into the answer choices. Choice (A) becomes 3 = 2(–1) + 5,
   then 3 = –2 + 5, and then 3 = 3. This is true, so try the second pair of
   values in (A). Plug in x = 0 and h(x) = 5 and the function becomes 5 =
   2(0) + 5, then 5 = 0 + 5, and then 5 = 5. This is also true. Since both
   pairs work in the function defined by (A), it is the correct function. The
   correct answer is (A).

21. D
   The question asks for an equation in terms of a specific variable. The

   question asks about the relationship among variables and there are
   variables in the answer choices, so plugging in is a good option. That
   might get messy with three variables, and all of the answer choices
   have r by itself, so the other option is to solve for r. To begin to isolate
   r, add 6s to both sides of the equation to get p + 6s = 13r. Divide both

   sides of the equation by 13 to get            . Flip the sides of the

   equation to get           . The correct answer is (D).

22. A

   The question asks for the value of a trigonometric function. Use the
   Geometry Basic Approach. Start by drawing two right triangles that are
   similar to each other, meaning they have the same proportions but are
   different sizes. Be certain to match up the corresponding angles that are
   given in the question, and put the longest side opposite the right angle.
   Then label the sides of triangle ABC with the lengths given in the
   question. The drawing should look something like this:




   The question asks for the cosine of angle L, which corresponds to angle

   A. Trig functions are proportional so cos(L) = cos(A), and it is possible
     to answer the question without knowing any of the side lengths of
     triangle LMN. To find cos(A), use SOHCAHTOA to remember the trig
     functions and label the sides. The CAH part of the acronym defines the

     cosine as               . The side adjacent to A is 165, and the

     hypotenuse is 325, so                . Since cos(L) = cos(A), cos(L) is

     also     . To match the result with an answer choice, either use a

     calculator to find the decimal equivalent or reduce the fraction. Using a

     calculator,                and              . To reduce the fraction,

     notice that both numbers are multiples of 5, and divide the numerator

     and denominator by 5 to get               . Either way, the correct

     answer is (A).

Module 2—Harder
1.   A

     The question asks for an equivalent form of an expression. Use bite-
     sized pieces and the Process of Elimination to tackle this question. The
     only term with a single a is 6a, so it cannot be combined with any other
     terms and must appear in the correct answer. Eliminate (B) and (C)
     because they do not include 6a. Combine the two terms with a3 to get
     3a3 – 5a3 = –2a3. Eliminate (D) because it does not include –2a3. The
     correct answer is (A).

2.   A
     The question asks for a percent based on the information provided.
     Start by ballparking: 10% of 45,000,000 is 4,500,000, so 4,950,000 is
     a little more than 10%. Eliminate (C) and (D) because they are much
     too large. Choice (A) is likely correct, but to check, plug in 11%.

     Percent means out of 100, so 11% can be represented as        . Multiply

     this by the total number of shirts to get                              .

     This matches the number of white shirts given in the question. The
     correct answer is (A).

3.   –120

     The question asks for the value of an expression based on an equation.
     When a Digital SAT question asks for the value of an expression, there
     is usually a straightforward way to solve for the expression without
     needing to completely isolate the variable. Start solving by distributing
     the numbers outside the parentheses on both sides of the equation. The
     equation becomes 3x – 24 – 16 = 8x + 80 + x. Simplify both sides of
     the equation to get 3x – 40 = 9x + 80. Subtract 3x from both sides of the
     equation to get –40 = 6x + 80, then subtract 80 from both sides of the
     equation to get –120 = 6x. The question asked for the value of 6x, so
     stop here. The correct answer is –120.

4.   B

     The question asks for the value of an expression based on an equation.
     When a Digital SAT question asks for the value of an expression, there
     is usually a straightforward way to solve for the expression without
     needing to completely isolate the variable. Start by subtracting 8(a – 3)
     from both sides of the equation to get –17 = 9(a – 3) – 8(a – 3).
     Combine the terms with (a – 3) to get –17 = (9 – 8)(a – 3), which
     becomes –17 = 1(a – 3), or –17 = a – 3. The correct answer is (B).

5.   C

     The question asks for the meaning of a constant in context. Start by
     reading the final question, which asks for the meaning of the constant b.
     Then label the parts of the equation with the information given. The
     question states that the lab area is 30 square feet, the seating area is 80
     square feet, and the total number of floor tiles is 4,200. Rewrite the
     equation with these labels: (lab area size)(a) + (seating area size)(b) =
     total tiles. Next, use Process of Elimination to get rid of answer
     choices that are not consistent with the labels. Since b is multiplied by
     the size of the seating area, eliminate (A) and (B) because they refer to
     the lab area, not the seating area. Compare the remaining answer
     choices. The difference is between the average number of tiles and the
     total number of tiles. Since b is multiplied by the number of square feet
     in the seating area, it must represent a value per square foot, not a total
     value. Keep (C) because it is consistent with this information, and
     eliminate (D) because it refers to a total number. The correct answer is
     (C).

6.   D

     The question asks for the change in a value given a proportion. Use the
     Geometry Basic Approach. Start by drawing two triangles, one with a
     smaller base than the other. The question asks about the height, so draw
     a line for the height. This figure should look something like this:
Next, label the figure with the information given. Since no specific
numbers are given for the base and the height, plug in. Make the height
of the larger triangle 100, so the base would be 65% of 100 or just 65.
If the base decreases by 13 inches, the new base would be 65 – 13 = 52
inches.

Label this information on the figure, which now looks like this:




Since the base is smaller and the proportions stay the same, the height
must also be smaller. Eliminate (A) and (B) because they would both
make the height larger. To find the length of the new height, set up a

proportion for        :          . Cross-multiply to get (100)(52) =
     (65)(x). Simplify both sides of the equation to get 5,200 = 65x. Divide
     both sides of the equation by 65 to get 80 = x. Since the original height
     was 100, the change is 100 – 80 = 20. The new height is less than the
     original height, so it decreased by 20. The correct answer is (D).

7.   B

     The question asks for an equation in terms of a specific variable. Since
     the question is about the relationship between variables and the
     answers contain variables, plug in. The fraction on the left side of the
     equation could make the numbers awkward, so start on the right side of
     the equation and make b = 2. The equation becomes                    , then

                 , and then         . Multiply both sides of the equation by 3

     to get a = –12. Now plug a = –12 and b = 2 into the answer choices and
     eliminate any that do not work. Choice (A) becomes                   , then

             . This is not true, so eliminate (A). Choice (B) becomes

                    , then       , and then 2 = 2. This is true, so keep (B)

     but check the remaining answers just in case. Choice (C) becomes
                  , then 2 = 10 + (–4), and then 2 = 6; eliminate (C). Choice

     (D) becomes                , then              , and then        ;

     eliminate (D). The correct answer is (B).

8.   B
     The question asks for the value of a constant given two equivalent
     expressions. Start by rewriting the expressions with an equal sign

     between them to get                  . Next, start to solve by cross-

     multiplying. The equation becomes (y + c)(15) = (3)(5y + 30).
     Distribute on both sides of the equation to get 15y + 15c = 15y + 90.

     Subtract 15y from both sides of the equation to get 15c = 90. Divide
     both sides of the equation by 15 to get c = 6. The correct answer is (B).

9.   25

     The question asks for the value of a constant, given information about
     circles in the coordinate plane. The equation of a circle in standard
     form is (x – h)2 + (y – k)2 = r2, where (h, k) is the center and r is the
     radius. In the equation given for circle O, r2 = 64. Take the square root
     of both sides of the equation to get r = 8. The question states that the
     radius of circle P is three less than the radius of circle O, so the
     radius of circle P is 8 – 3 = 5. Plug r = 5 into the equation of circle P to
     get (x – 7)2 + (y + 7)2 = 52, or (x – 7)2 + (y + 7)2 = 25. Thus, c = 25.
     The correct answer is 25.

10. C

     The question asks for a maximum value given a specific situation.

     Since the question asks for a specific value and the answers contain
     numbers in increasing order, plug in the answers. Rewrite the answer
     choices on the scratch paper and label them “number of laptops.” Next,
     pick a value to start with. Since the question asks for the maximum,
   start with the largest number, 146. The question states that each laptop
   costs $149, so multiply that by the number of laptops to get ($149)
   (146) = $21,754. The question also states that there is a 7.5% discount
   on orders of at least 100 laptops. Since 146 is more than 100, the
   discount applies. Take 7.5% of the cost and subtract the result from the

   cost to get                                         . This is greater than

   the donation of $20,000, so eliminate (D). The result was close, so
   plug in the next largest value, 145, for the number of laptops. The initial
   cost becomes ($149)(145) = $21,605. Apply the 7.5% discount to get

                                            . This is less than the donation

   of $20,000, so the school can purchase 145 laptops. The correct
   answer is (C).

11. A

   The question asks for the value of the x-coordinate of the solution to a
   system of equations. The quickest method is to enter both equations into
   a graphing calculator, then scroll and zoom as needed to find the points
   of intersection. The graph shows two points of intersection: (3, 1) and
   (–4, 22), so the x-coordinate is either 3 or –4. Only –4 is in an answer
   choice, so choose (A). To solve the system for the x-coordinate
   algebraically, substitute –3x + 10 for y in the first equation to get 3x2 –
   (–3x + 10) – 26 = 0. Distribute the negative sign to get 3x2 + 3x – 10 –
   26 = 0, then combine like terms to get 3x2 + 3x – 36 = 0. Factor out 3 to
   get 3(x2 + x – 12) = 0. Factor the quadratic to get 3(x + 4)(x – 3) = 0.
   Set each factor equal to 0 and solve to get x = –4 and x = 3. Using
   either method, the correct answer is (A).

12. A

   The question asks for the number of solutions to an equation. Distribute
   on both sides of the equation to get –24y – 12 = 12 – 24y. Add 24y to
   both sides of the equation to get –12 = 12. This is not true, so the
   equation has no solutions. The correct answer is (A).

13. D

   The question asks for an x-intercept of a parabola. Sketch a graph using
   the given points, and label those points. The vertex of a parabola is on
   the axis of symmetry, so the axis of symmetry of this parabola is the line
   x = 5; add this line to the graph. The graph should look something like
   this:




   The two x-intercepts are an equal distance from the line of symmetry.
   The x-coordinate of the given x-intercept is –1.5, so the distance from
   the line of symmetry is 5 – (–1.5) = 6.5. The x-coordinate of the other
   x-intercept is thus 5 + 6.5 = 11.5. The correct answer is (D).

14. C

   The question asks for an equation that represents a graph. To find the
   best equation, compare features of the graph to the answer choices. The
   answer choices all take the form y = mx + b, in which m is the slope
   and b is the y-intercept. All of the answer choices have the same slope,
   so focus on the y-intercept. The graph shown in the question has been
   transformed from the graph of function g. Adding or subtracting outside
   the parentheses shifts the graph up or down. Thus, the given graph of
   g(x) – 10 is shifted 10 units down from the graph of g(x). Undo this by
   adding 10 to transform the given graph back to g(x). The graph of g(x)
   – 10 has its y-intercept at (0, –5). Move the point up 10 units to get a y-
   intercept of (0, 5). Eliminate (A), (B), and (D) because the equations
   have the wrong y-intercept. The correct answer is (C).

15. D

   The question asks for the value of a constant in a quadratic equation. To
   determine when a quadratic equation has no real solutions, use the
   discriminant. The discriminant is the part of the quadratic formula
   under the square root sign and is written as D = b2 – 4ac. When the
   discriminant is positive, the quadratic has exactly two real solutions;
   when the discriminant is 0, the quadratic has exactly one real solution;
   and when the discriminant is negative, the quadratic has no real
   solutions. Thus, the discriminant of this quadratic must equal a negative
   number. First, put the quadratic in standard form, which is ax2 + bx + c
   = 0, by adding 5x to both sides of the equation to get 10x2 + 5x + c = 0.
   Now a = 10, b = 5, and c = c. Plug these into the discriminant formula
   to get D = (5)2 – 4(10)(c), or D = 25 – 40c. Next, plug in the values
   from the answer choices to see which value of c makes the discriminant
   negative. Start with a middle answer and try (C), 0. If c = 0, the
   discriminant becomes D = 25 – 40(0), or D = 25. This is not negative,
   so eliminate (C). It might not be clear whether a larger or smaller
   number is needed, so pick a direction and try (D), 1. If c = 1, the
   discriminant becomes D = (5)2 – (4)(10)(1), or D = 25 – 40, and then
   D = –15. This is negative, so stop here. The correct answer is (D).

16. A
   The question asks for the value of an expression given the equation of a
   graph in the xy-plane. One method is to use a graphing calculator. Enter
   the equation of the line, then scroll and zoom as needed to find the
   intercepts. The x-intercept is at (5.667, 0), and the y-intercept is at (0, –

   4.25). Thus, c = 5.667, k = –4.25, and                       . This is the

   same value as      , which matches (A). To solve algebraically, plug the

   given points into the equation of the line. Plug in x = c and y = 0 to get
   3c – 4(0) = 17, or 3c = 17. Divide both sides of the equation by 3 to get

         . Next, plug in x = 0 and y = k to get 3(0) – 4k = 17, or –4k = 17.

   Divide both sides of the equation by –4 to get            . Finally, divide


   c by k to get          . When dividing fractions, multiply the reciprocal


   of the fraction in the denominator and the fraction in the numerator. This

   becomes                     , and then         . Using either method, the

   correct answer is (A).

17. 12

   The question asks for the value of a constant in a system of equations.
   When a system of linear equations has infinitely many solutions, the
   two equations form the same line and are equivalent to each other.
   Since c is a coefficient of g, look for a way to cancel the f-terms and
   the constants when stacking and adding the equations. First, put the two
   equations in the same order by subtracting 21g from both sides of the
   second equation to get 21 = 6f – 36g, and then subtract 6f from both
   sides of the second equation to get 21 – 6f = –36g. The f-term and
   constant of the second equation are both 3 times the equivalent terms in
   the first equation with opposite signs, so multiply the first equation by 3
   to get –21 + 6f = 3cg. Now stack and add the equations.




   Add 36g to both sides of the resulting equation to get 36g = 3cg.
   Divide both sides of the equation by 3g to get 12 = c. The correct
   answer is 12.

18. C

   The question asks for the perimeter of a triangle. Use the Geometry
   Basic Approach. Start by drawing a triangle on the scratch paper with a
   right angle and one of the remaining angles twice the size of the other.
   Next, label the figure with the information given, and label the smallest
   side as 15. The drawing should look something like this:




   A 30:60:90 triangle is one of the special right triangles that has a
   specific proportional relationship among the sides. The proportion can
   be found by clicking open the reference sheet, and it is x:     :2x. Since
   the smallest side is 15, x = 15. The other sides are       and 2(15) =
   30. Label the figure with this information; the figure now looks like
   this:
   The perimeter of a geometric shape is the sum of the lengths of all of
   the sides. Add all three side lengths to get 15 +     + 30 = 45 +      .
   The correct answer is (C).

19. B

   The question asks for the value of an expression based on information
   about a function. In function notation, f(x) = y. The number inside the
   parentheses is the x-value that goes into the function, or the input, and
   the value that comes out of the function is the y-value, or the output. The
   table gives four pairs of input and output values for the function. To
   solve for the constants c and d, start by plugging in one of the pairs
   from the table. Plug x = 2 and g(x) = 46 into the function to get 46 = 2c
   + d. There is no way to solve for c + d using only this equation, so plug
   in a second pair of values. Plug x = 4 and g(x) = 0 into the function to
   get 0 = 4c + d. There are now two equations with two constants, so find
   a way to make one of the constants disappear when stacking and adding
   the equations. Multiply the second equation by –1 to get 0 = –4c – d.

   The d-terms are now the same with opposite signs, so stack and add the
   two equations.
    Divide both sides of the resulting equation by –2 to get c = –23. Plug c
    = –23 into the first equation to get 46 = 2(–23) + d, or 46 = –46 + d.
    Add 46 to both sides of the equation to get 92 = d. Add the values of
    the two constants to get c + d = –23 + 92 = 69. The correct answer is
    (B).

20. 105

    The question asks for a value given information about the mean, or
    average, of a data set. For averages, use the formula T = AN, in which T
    is the Total, A is the Average, and N is the Number of things. Start by
    finding the mean of the four integers given in the question. There are 4
    values, so N = 4. Find the Total by adding the four integers to get T =
    114 + 109 + 106 + 111 = 440. The average formula becomes 440 = (A)
    (4). Divide both sides of the equation by 4 to get A = 110. The question
    asks for the smallest integer that results in the full data set having an
    average less than that of the four integers shown, which is 110. Start
    with the next smallest integer, 109, for the average, and solve for the
    fifth integer in the data set. The average formula becomes T = (109)(5),
    so T = 545. The total of the first four integers was 440, so the fifth
    integer is 545 – 440 = 105. The question also states that the mean of
    the entire data set is an integer and that all of the integers are greater
    than 101, and 105 meets both of these conditions. To see whether a
    smaller integer meets all of the conditions given in the question, try an
    average of 108. The Total is now T = (108)(5) = 540, and the fifth
    integer is 540 – 440 = 100. This is not greater than 101, so 100 is too
    small. The correct answer is 105.

21. B

    The question asks for the function that represents a certain situation.
    There are variables in the answer choices, and the question asks about
    the relationship between the number of points and the number of
    assignments, so plug in. Make a = 51 to include the 5-point assignments
   and at least one 3-point assignment. The first 50 completed assignments
   earn 5 points each, for a total of (50)(5) = 250 points. The additional
   completed assignment earns 3 points. The total number of points earned
   for the 51 completed assignments is 250 + 3 = 253. This is the target
   value; write it down and circle it. Now plug a = 51 into the answer
   choices and eliminate any that do not match the target value. In function
   notation, f(x) = y. The number inside the parentheses is the x-value that
   goes into the function, or the input, and the value that comes out of the
   function is the y-value, or the output. Since a = 51, 51 is the input
   value, and the output value should be 253. Choice (A) becomes g(51) =
   3(51) + 5, then g(51) = 153 + 5, and then g(51) = 158. This does not
   match the target value, so eliminate (A). Choice (B) becomes g(51) =
   3(51) + 100, then g(51) = 153 + 100, and then g(51) = 253. This
   matches the target, so keep (B) but check the remaining answers just in
   case. Choice (C) becomes g(51) = 3(51) + 250, then g(51) = 153 +
   250, and then g(51) = 403; eliminate (C). Choice (D) becomes g(51) =
   8(51) – 150, then 408 – 150, and then g(51) = 258; eliminate (D). The
   correct answer is (B).

22. D

   The question asks for information that will provide proof of similar
   triangles. Use the Geometry Basic Approach. Triangles are similar
   when they have the same angle measures and proportional side lengths,
   so draw two triangles on the scratch paper that look similar but are
   different sizes. Then label the figures with information from the
   question: label AB as 22, XY as 11, and angles A and X as 77°. The
   drawing should look something like this.
Next, evaluate the Roman numeral statements. They all give information
about angles, so focus on the rule that similar triangles have the same
three angle measures. The question only provides enough information to
know that one angle measure is the same in both triangles, so more
information is necessary; eliminate (A). Angle measures alone do
provide enough information if all three angles have the same measure,
so eliminate (B).

Check the remaining answers one at a time to see whether one shows
that all three angles have the same measure. Try (C), and label angle B
as 40° and angle Y as 50°. Find the measure of the third angle in each
triangle. All triangles contain 180°, so set up equations: 77° + 40° + C°
= 180°, and 77° + 50° + Z° = 180°. Simplify the first equation to get
117° + C° = 180°, then subtract 117° from both sides of the equation to
get C = 63°. Simplify the second equation to get 127° + Z° = 180°, then
subtract 127° from both sides of the equation to get Z = 53°.

Label the figures with this information, and they now look like this:
The triangles do not have the same three angle measures, so they are not
similar; eliminate (C). Try (D) and follow the same steps. Label angle
B as 40° and angle Z as 63°. Angle C is again 63°. Solve for angle Y:
77° + Y° + 63° = 180°, 140° + Y° = 180°, and Y° = 40°. Label the
triangles with this information to see that the triangles now have the
same three angle measures. The correct answer is (D).
Chapter 4
Cracking the Digital SAT: Basic
Principles
The first step to cracking the Digital SAT is knowing how best to approach
the test. The Digital SAT is not like many of the tests you’ve taken in school,
so you need to learn to look at it in a different way. This chapter provides
and explains test-taking strategies that will immediately improve your score
before you spend time working on the actual test content. Make sure you fully
understand these concepts before moving on to Part II. Good luck!
BASIC PRINCIPLES OF CRACKING THE TEST
What College Board Does Well
The folks at College Board have been writing standardized tests for a long
time. Even though the test format is new for the Digital SAT, the concepts
tested are the same, so the test-writers still know how students will approach
the questions. They know how you’ll attempt certain questions, what sort of
mistakes you’ll probably make, and even what answer you’ll be most likely
to pick. Freaky, isn’t it?

However, this strength is also a weakness. Because the test is standardized,
the Digital SAT asks the same types of questions over and over again. Sure,
the numbers or the words might change, but the basics don’t. With enough
practice, you can learn to think like the test-writers. But try to use your
powers for good, okay?

The Digital SAT Isn’t School
Our job isn’t to teach you math or English—leave that to your super smart
school teachers. Instead, we’re going to teach you what the Digital SAT is
and how to crack it. You’ll soon see that the Digital SAT involves a very
different skill set from the one you use in school.

Be warned that some of the approaches we’re going to show you may seem
counterintuitive or unnatural. Some of these strategies may be very different
from the way you learned to approach similar questions in school, but trust
us! Try tackling the questions using our techniques, and keep practicing until
they become easier. When you do this, you’ll see a real improvement in your
score.


TAKE THE EASY TEST FIRST
Within a section, each question counts toward your score. There will
inevitably be questions you are great at and questions you don’t like. The
beauty of the Digital SAT is that you can answer questions in any order you
like. The question you can nail in 25 seconds may be worth just as much as
the question that will torture you for minutes on end. Why should you spend 4
or 5 minutes on one question when you can answer two or three questions
that are easier for you in the same amount of time? To maximize your score,
leave the questions you don’t like for last. That way, if you do run out of
time, at least you’ve gotten a chance to answer all the questions that you find
easiest.

You can think of this as taking the easy test first. Skip early and skip often.
Doing so will result in two passes through an individual module. On the first
pass, cherry-pick. Answer the questions you like. Get all of those easy points
in the bank before time starts running short. Nearly everyone at some point
starts to feel the pressure of the clock as time starts running low. This is often
when mistakes happen. Leave those difficult, time-consuming questions for
the end of the test. If you run out of time or make some mistakes at that point,
it won’t matter as much because these are questions that you are less likely to
get right anyway. Focus your time where you feel confident you are likely to
score points.

Embrace Your POOD
When you take the easy test first, you are using your POOD, or Personal
Order of Difficulty. The Digital SAT will put questions in rough order of
difficulty by content domain on the Reading and Writing section and overall
on the Math section. But this Order of Difficulty (OOD) is only what College
Board thinks about the question levels, not how you will do on them. And
different people do well on different types of questions. We believe it is
essential that you identify the questions that you find easy or hard and that you
work the test in a way most suitable to your goals and strengths. The way this
works may differ in the Reading and Writing section and the Math section,
but we’ll give you the tools to establish your POOD.

Mark and Move On
On your first pass through a section, you will likely see questions that strike
you as too hard or too time-consuming. If you think they are worth coming
back to in the second pass, use the Mark for Review tool to add a little flag
next to the question. Then keep on moving until you find a question that better
suits your POOD.

Sometimes, though, a question that seems easy at first may turn out to be more
troublesome than it appeared. If you get stuck on a question, don’t keep
working on it. Mark it and move on to do more questions. Only once you’ve
conquered all the questions in your POOD should you come back and retry a
question. Often, given some distance from the question, you can come back to
it with fresh eyes and get the right answer. If you encounter more trouble,
though, move on again. Find another question in the module to distract your
brain whenever you get stuck.

You can see the marked questions at a glance both at the end of the module
and by opening the module overview at any time. This will allow you to
quickly find the ones you want to work on after you’ve done all the questions
you know you can do quickly and accurately.

As you see a question on the screen, the testing app tells you where you are
in the module. The question navigation bar is a black bar at the bottom of the
screen. Clicking it opens the Review tool, which gives you an overview of
the module that will look something like this.
Navigating around a section is easy from here. Simply click on a question,
and you will go directly to that question. This opens up a whole new realm of
strategic opportunities for the savvy test-taker. It also allows you to quickly
see any questions that remain unanswered in the final minutes so that you can
enter answers for them.

Let’s say the example above is your section. At this point, you have seen all
22 questions in the module. Questions 11, 18, and 19 are unanswered and
haven’t been marked. These are questions that you likely skipped because
they looked very difficult and/or time-consuming, and you should do them
only at the very end if there is any time left. Then, there are 5 marked
questions, some of which have been answered. You might have marked these
because you got an answer but weren’t sure it was right or because you
started the question but then got stuck. After you’ve taken the easy test, you
should go back to the marked questions and attempt to get as many of them
right as you can, starting with the easiest ones or the ones that are closest to
being finished. Remember to unmark a question once you’ve finalized your
answer.
Keep an eye on the timer. When there is a minute left, go back to any of your
unanswered questions and enter a guess, even a random one if necessary.


                       Navigating the Test Modules

            In your first pass, only do questions that you think you
            can do quickly and accurately.
            If you start a question and get stuck, mark it and move on.
            If you think a question is a good one to do later, mark it
            to easily find it again.
            If you see a question that looks tough but may be in your
            POOD, leave it blank.
            If you see a question that you know you never want to
            tackle, fill in an answer and move on.
            In your second pass, do the marked questions that seem
            most suited to your POOD. Then do any unanswered
            questions you think are worth trying.
            If you decide to skip any questions in the second pass,
            fill in an answer and move on.
            In the last minute or two, use the Review tool to ensure
            that every question has been answered.


Just be careful when using the Review Page instead of accessing the
overview from the question navigation bar. If you are on that page and click
Next, it will end the module. You will not be asked if you are sure you want
to submit your answers and move on. So, make sure to only click Next from
the Review Page if all your answers have been entered.

Guessing on the Digital SAT
You may be wondering why we’re telling you to enter answers to some
questions you haven’t even fully read. No matter how much you practice, you
still may run into a question that you don’t know how to answer no matter
how many times you look at it. Or, you may look at a question with an
incredibly long or difficult-looking text and decide it’s not worth your time
and energy.

When you confront a question like this, try to eliminate any answer choice
you can, but make sure to guess. There is no penalty for incorrect answers on
the Digital SAT. As a result, it’s better to guess than it is to leave a question
blank. At least by guessing, you stand a chance at getting lucky and guessing
correctly.

                 No Wrong-Answer Penalty!
                 You will NOT be penalized on the Digital SAT for any
                 wrong answers. This means you should always
                 guess rather than leaving a question blank, even if
                 this means choosing an answer at random.


So, what should you guess? We recommend that you always guess the same
letter on questions you skip. We call it your Letter of the Day (LOTD).
Having a go-to answer will save you from having to think about it each time.
You’ll be less tempted to stare at the answers and try to make an “educated
guess.” You can just click on it and move on, without getting hung up on
reviewing the answers and seeing if any jump out at you for a question you
didn’t know how to do or have time for in the first place. Save yourself
precious microseconds by using your LOTD on these questions.

Pace Yourself
By now, we’ve talked a lot about skipping some questions. You may think
you need to work to answer every question to get a good score on the Digital
SAT. The truth is, rushing through to try to do every question can lead to
careless mistakes, causing you to lose points. You are much better off
focusing your attention fully on the questions in your POOD and only
answering the harder or more time-consuming ones after you’ve built up
those easier points. As you improve, you can aim to answer more questions
in each module and guess on fewer. Unless you’re currently scoring in the
700+ range on the two sections, you shouldn’t be working all the questions.


           Slow down, score more. You’re not scored on how many
                             questions you do.
         You’re scored on how many questions you answer correctly.
            Doing fewer questions can mean more correct answers
                                  overall!


Now that you know how to navigate the modules to find questions in your
POOD, let’s talk about some strategies to use on the questions as you work
through them.


CRACKING MULTIPLE-CHOICE QUESTIONS
       What is the capital of Azerbaijan?

Give up?

Unless you spend your spare time studying an atlas or live in that region of
the world, you may not know Azerbaijan’s capital. If this question came up
on a test, you’d have to skip it, wouldn’t you? Well, maybe not. To find out if
you can figure out the answer anyway, let’s turn this question into a multiple-
choice question—just like the majority of questions you’ll find on the Digital
SAT.

  1.      Mark for Review
       What is the capital of Azerbaijan?

         A Washington, D.C.
        B Paris

        C London

        D Baku

The question doesn’t seem that hard anymore, does it? Of course, we made
our example extremely easy. (By the way, there won’t actually be any
questions about geography on the Digital SAT.) But you’d be surprised by
how many people give up on Digital SAT questions that aren’t much more
difficult than this one just because they don’t know the correct answer right
off the top of their heads. “Capital of Azerbaijan? Oh, no! I’ve never heard of
Azerbaijan!”

These students don’t stop to think that they might be able to find the correct
answer simply by eliminating all of the answer choices they know are wrong.

You Already Know Almost All of the Answers
All but a handful of the questions on the Digital SAT are multiple-choice
questions, and every multiple-choice question has four answer choices. One
of those choices, and only one, will be the correct answer to the question.
You don’t have to come up with the answer from scratch. You just have to
identify it.

How will you do that?

Look for the Wrong Answers Instead of the Right Ones
Why? Because wrong answers are usually easier to find than the right ones.
After all, there are more of them! Remember the question about Azerbaijan?
Even though you didn’t know the answer off the top of your head, you easily
figured it out by eliminating the three obviously incorrect choices.

You looked for wrong answers first.
In other words, you used Process of Elimination, which we’ll call POE for
short. This is an extremely important concept, one we’ll come back to again
and again. It’s one of the keys to improving your Digital SAT score. When
you finish reading this book, you will be able to use POE to answer many
questions that you may not understand.

The great artist Michelangelo once said that when he looked at a block of
marble, he could see a statue inside. All he had to do to make a sculpture
was to chip away everything that wasn’t part of it. You should approach
difficult multiple-choice questions on the Digital SAT in the same way, by
“chipping away” the answers that are not correct. By first eliminating the
most obviously incorrect choices on difficult questions, you will be able to
focus your attention on the few choices that remain.


PROCESS OF ELIMINATION (POE)
There won’t be many questions on the Digital SAT in which incorrect
choices will be as easy to eliminate as they were on the Azerbaijan question.
But if you read this book carefully, you’ll learn how to eliminate at least one
choice on almost any Digital SAT multiple-choice question, if not two or
even three choices.

What good is it to eliminate just one or two choices on a four-choice Digital
SAT question?

Plenty. In fact, for most students, it’s an important key to earning higher
scores. For every answer that you confidently eliminate, you increase the
odds of selecting the correct answer, even on harder questions. Here’s
another example:

  2.      Mark for Review
       What is the capital of Qatar?

         A Paris
         B Dukhan

         C Tokyo

         D Doha

On this question, you’ll almost certainly be able to eliminate two of the four
choices by using POE. That means you’re still not sure of the answer. You
know that the capital of Qatar has to be either Doha or Dukhan, but you don’t
know which. So just pick one and move on! You’ve already improved your
chances of getting it right from 25% to 50%.

The Answer Eliminator Tool
The Digital SAT Bluebook app has a great tool to help you keep track of your
POE. It is called the Answer Eliminator, and it crosses off answers for you
right on the screen. To use it, click the box on the right side of the gray bar
that has “ABC” with a slash through the letters. A new set of letters will
appear to the right of each answer, and clicking on one crosses off the
corresponding answer.

Here is what our Qatar question would look like after eliminating (A) and
(C).

  2.      Mark for Review
       What is the capital of Qatar?

         A Paris

         B Dukhan

         C Tokyo

         D Doha
This tool is a great way to keep track of your thoughts on each answer and
see which ones remain after using POE. And if you decide to mark this
question to come back to it, your eliminated answers will still be crossed off
when you return.

The Annotate Tool
But what if you want to remember something specific about the question or
the remaining answers? In the Reading and Writing section, there is a tool for
that as well. If you highlight some text on the screen, you can then click the
Annotate button to add a notation to that text. Again, this will be saved as you
move through the module, so it will still be there if you come back to a
question. We’ll give you more advice in the coming chapters on how to make
use of this great tool.

However, there are some limitations to the Annotate tool. You cannot
annotate text on figures or from the answer choices, so you would have to
leave yourself a note on the question stem or the passage text. Also, this tool
is not available in the Math section at all.

                 Try It Out!
                 When you take a practice test in the digital testing
                 app, use that opportunity to try out all the tools.
                 Being familiar and comfortable with these tools on
                 test day will give you a real leg up, as you won’t have
                 to waste time during the test getting used to them.



Scratch Paper
This brings us to the final tool that may help you stay organized on the Digital
SAT. When you arrive at the testing center, you will be given three pages of
scratch paper to use. If you find that you have trouble making annotations in
the Reading and Writing section or you have calculations to do in the Math
section, your scratch paper is there for you.
While you can use the Answer Eliminator tool to cross off answers you know
are wrong, you may need a more sophisticated way to track what you think of
certain answers to narrow down choices. In those cases, write the question
number and answer letters on your scratch paper and use the following
notations to help you make the best possible guess.

   ✓ Put a check mark next to an answer that seems correct.

     Put a squiggle next to an answer that seems like it could work but

     you’re not sure.

   ? Put a question mark next to an answer you don’t understand.

   A Cross out the letter of any answer choice you KNOW is wrong.

You can always come up with your own system. Just make sure you are
consistent. Do your best to keep your scratch paper neat and organized. If you
do come back to a question later, you want to be able to easily find your
work. We’ll give you more tips for using your scratch paper in the following
lessons.

Double-Check
By now, you have learned strategies for navigating the modules of the Digital
SAT and for dealing with the questions as you work them. You’ve also seen a
bit of information about the tools at your disposal and how to use them. All
these things should help you get an answer to the questions you work on, but
get in the habit of double-checking before you click on your final answer
choice. You probably won’t have time to go back to a question that you have
already finished, so it’s best to ensure that you’ve answered as you intend to
the first time.
The only way to reliably avoid careless errors is to adopt habits that make
them less likely to occur. Always check to see that you’ve transcribed
information correctly to your scratch paper. Always read the problem
carefully and note any important parts that you might forget later. Always
check your calculations. And always read the question one last time before
selecting your answer. By training yourself to avoid careless errors, you will
increase your score.
Summary
 Take the easy test first. Work carefully on questions you know how to do
 to make sure you get them right.

 Use the Mark for Review tool to flag questions you want to come back to
 later.

 There are bound to be at least a few questions you simply don’t get to or
 ones on which you find it difficult to eliminate even one answer choice.
 When this happens, use the LOTD (Letter of the Day) strategy.

 There’s no guessing penalty on the Digital SAT, so it’s best to guess
 rather than leave a question blank.

 When you don’t know the right answer to a multiple-choice question,
 look for wrong answers instead. They’re usually easier to find.

 When you find a wrong answer, use the Answer Eliminator tool to cross
 it off on the screen. In other words, use Process of Elimination, or POE.

 Use the Annotate tool to leave notes for yourself on Reading and Writing
 questions as needed.

 Use your scratch paper for more complex POE or other notations and
 calculations. Keep your work neat and organized, with a question
 number next to every note.

 Get into the habit of double-checking your work to avoid careless errors
 as much as possible.

 Make the test your own. When you can work the test to suit your
 strengths (and use our strategies to overcome any weaknesses), you’ll be
 on your way to a higher score.
Part II
How to Crack the Reading and
Writing Section
  5 Reading and Writing Introduction
  6 The Reading Questions
  7 Reading Question Types 1–3: Craft and Structure
  8 Reading Question Types 4–8: Information and Ideas
  9 Advanced Reading Skills
 10 Comprehensive Reading Drills
 11 Introduction to Rules Questions
 12 Rules Questions: Complete Sentences
 13 Rules Questions: Describing Phrases
 14 Rules Questions: Linking Independent Clauses
 15 Rules Questions: Dependent Clauses, Lists, and No Punctuation
 16 Rules Questions: Grammar
 17 Rhetoric Questions
Chapter 5
Reading and Writing Introduction
Now that you’ve learned some general strategies for the Digital SAT and
taken and analyzed your first test, it is time to dive into some content
chapters. This chapter will introduce you to the Reading and Writing section
of the Digital SAT.
FIND YOUR STRENGTHS AND WEAKNESSES
As you may recall from the Introduction, your Digital SAT is going to have
two Reading and Writing modules, each consisting of 27 questions. Of those
54 total verbal questions, 25–33 will be Reading questions and 19–31 will
be Writing questions. You’ll have 32 minutes for each module, which gives
you a little more than a minute for each question.

While College Board jams the topics of Reading and Writing into the same
section, you may have recognized that they really represent two different sets
of skills. The Reading questions ask you to either answer a question about a
text you have read (such as what its main idea is or why the author included a
certain piece of information) or choose an answer that completes the text
based on the inferences that can be made. On the other hand, the Writing
questions will ask you to choose the best construction of a sentence based on
such aspects as punctuation, grammar, and style. These questions will also
ask you to connect ideas with transitions or to fit certain rhetorical goals.

This distinction is important because you may find that you are stronger at
Reading or stronger at Writing. Recognizing your strengths and weaknesses
will help you follow POOD most effectively, and as you practice it will
allow you to identify what areas you need to focus on during your study time.


THE LESSER OF TWO (OR THREE) EVILS
We think you’ll find it most helpful to think of each Reading and Writing
module as having 3 parts, displayed visually below.




This is the same order and rough proportion of questions you will see in each
module. If you are stronger or faster at Writing questions, you may find that it
makes more sense for you to start about halfway through the section where
those questions start. Of course, if Reading questions are easier for you, it’s
fine to start at the beginning of the module. Either way, it’s helpful to be able
to recognize these three categories of questions so that you’ll notice when the
module switches from one to the next and be able to apply the right set of
steps to each question type. Let’s take a look at the characteristics of each
category.

                 Reading actually has two parts according to College
                 Board, but there isn’t a strong difference in the types
                 of questions you’ll see in both parts, so we don’t
                 think you need to notice when the section switches.



Reading Questions
Any question with text in the form of a poem or a work of fiction is going to
be in the Reading portion. The same is true for dual texts (which have a Text
1 and a Text 2), passages that involve graphs, and questions that ask you to
fill in the blank with the most appropriate word. The rest of the Reading
questions will generally ask you for the meaning or purpose of some or all of
the text.

Rules Questions
It should be easy to spot when the module switches from Reading questions
to Rules questions. That’s because all Rules questions ask the same thing:
Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the conventions of
Standard English? Only Rules questions ask this, so if you’re planning to
start with the Rules questions, you can skip to about the middle of the section
and click ahead until you see the first one with that question. It’s worth noting
that Rules questions will be some of the fastest ones for many students, as
you typically only need to read a single sentence and will be tested on basic
punctuation and grammar rules rather than comprehension.

Rhetoric Questions
Once again, it should be easy to spot when the Rules questions end. That’s
because the rest of the questions, Rhetoric questions, will not ask the
standard question you saw above for Rules questions. If you want to start
with these questions, go about three-quarters of the way into the section and
continue until you stop seeing the questions about the conventions of Standard
English. Furthermore, Rhetoric questions come in only two formats. The first
involves transition words and the second has bullet points instead of a
passage. So, these should be relatively easy to identify by looking for those
two unique attributes, but you will learn more about these distinctions in later
chapters.

As you prepare for the Digital SAT, try to identify which of these three
categories makes sense for you to begin with. It’s best to start with the
category in which you will be able to get the questions right quickly and
easily.


STARTING OFF ON THE RIGHT SIDE…OF
THE SCREEN
As you saw earlier in this introduction, it’s the question, rather than the text,
that will give you a clue as to what category of question you are dealing with.
Once you’ve established that, you’ll be able to execute the appropriate
strategy for that specific type of question. To that end, we’ve developed a
basic approach for all Reading and Writing questions:



                    Reading and Writing Basic Approach

          1. Read the question.
          2. Identify the question type.
          3. Follow the basic approach for that question type.


As we discussed earlier, you are free (and encouraged!) to start with the
types of questions at which you excel and to leave for last the ones you
struggle with most or that you expect to take the most time. For each question,
skip over the text initially and go straight to the question. That will help you
to confirm whether it is a Reading question, Rules question, or Rhetoric
question. In some cases, such as with most Reading questions, reading the
question first will also give you an idea of what you need to find in the text,
which will allow you to do double duty as you read: you can already start to
look out for what the question will be asking you about as you read the text.

In the chapters that follow, we’ll show you our basic approach for each type
of question that we expect you to see on the Reading and Writing section.
Once you have learned and practiced these approaches, you’ll know exactly
what to do once you identify the type of question you are looking at. It’s
worth noting that we have put the verbal chapters in the same order that we
expect the questions to be in for both modules of the Reading and Writing
section, so you can use them as a guide for approximately where each
question type will appear. Let’s dive in!
Chapter 6
The Reading Questions
Reading questions will account for 25–33 of the 54 RW questions and will
always appear before the Writing questions in each module. The Reading
questions will ask you to perform many different, and of course highly
enjoyable, tasks, including selecting the best vocabulary word to fill in a
blank, understanding the function of a portion of the text, comparing multiple
texts, finding the main idea of a text, determining which answer would best
support the author’s argument, and completing the text based on data from
tables and graphs. Each text will range from 25 to 150 words and be
accompanied by just a single question, so efficiency will be of the essence.
The purpose of this chapter is to introduce you to how the Reading and
Writing Basic Approach can be adapted to each of the Reading question
types. This will help you streamline how you take the test and keep you
focused on what information you need in order to get as many points as you
can. Not many people would call the Reading questions overly fun, but this
chapter will teach you how to take control of the section and handle it on
your own terms.
SAT READING: CRACKING THE TEXTS
You read every day. From street signs to text messages to the back of the
cereal box, you spend a good part of your day recognizing written words. So,
this test should be pretty easy, right?

Unfortunately, reading on the Digital SAT is different from reading in real
life. In real life, you read passively. Your eyes go over the words, the words
go into your brain, and some stick and some don’t. On the Digital SAT, you
have to read actively, which means trying to find specific information to
answer specific questions. Once you’ve found the information you need, you
have to understand what it’s actually saying.

Reading on the Digital SAT is also very different from the reading you do in
school. In English class, you are often asked to give your own opinion and
support it with evidence from a text. You might have to explain how Scout
Finch and Boo Radley in To Kill a Mockingbird are, metaphorically
speaking, mockingbirds. Or you might be asked to explain who is actually
responsible for the tragedies in Romeo and Juliet. On the Digital SAT,
however, there is no opinion. You don’t have the opportunity to justify why
your answer is the right one. That means there is only one right answer, and
your job is to find it. It’s the weirdest scavenger hunt ever.

Let’s start with the instructions for the RW module.

       DIRECTIONS

      The questions in this section address a number of important reading and
      writing skills. Each question includes one or more passages, which may
      include a table or graph. Read each passage and question carefully, and then
      choose the best answer to the question based on the passage(s).

      All questions in the section are multiple-choice with four answer choices. Each
      question has a single best answer.
Great news! This is an open-book test. Notice the directions say based on
the passage(s). This means that you are NOT being tested on whether you
have read, studied, and become an expert on African folklore, The Great
Gatsby, or your biology textbook. All the test-writers care about is whether
or not you can read a text and understand it well enough to correctly answer a
question about it. Unlike the Math modules and the Writing questions, there
are no formulas to memorize or comma rules to learn for the Reading
questions. You just need to know how to approach the text(s), question, and
answer choices in a way that maximizes your accuracy and efficiency. It’s all
about the text!

Your Mission:

Identify what you are being asked to do for each question and locate the
answer or support in the text as efficiently as possible.

POOD and the Reading Questions
You will get one question with its text (or, occasionally, with two texts) on
screen at a time. While it’s tempting to do the questions in the order they
appear, you will sometimes be confronted with a question or text that seems
difficult or confusing to you for one reason or another. In that situation, mark
the question for review, use your LOTD, and move on to the next question.
You can always come back to your marked questions later after you’ve
tackled every question you knew how to do for certain. In short, the sooner
you move on from a frustrating, difficult question, the more time you have to
slow down and get many other questions correct.

Consider the following:

    Question Type: Throughout the Reading chapters, you’ll learn how to
    identify the different types of questions and you’ll learn the order they
    come in. Determine which ones will be fastest and easiest for you, and
    start with those. If you’re not sure what question types will be easiest for
    you, pay attention to how you do on the various question types as you do
    the practice tests and drills in this book.

    Literature: Fictional passages will contain a blurb introducing the
    author and title. This will help you quickly decide whether or not to do
    these passages. You’ll also spot poems quickly, and your strengths and
    weaknesses will tell you when to do those.

    Topic: You may be able to tell from glancing at the text whether it is
    about science, history, the arts, or another topic area. If you have
    significant topic-based strengths and weaknesses, use that knowledge to
    decide your POOD.


         Don’t forget: On any questions that you skip, always fill in
                                your LOTD!



The Reading Question Types
There are eight different question types on the Reading portion of the RW
module, and the good news is that they will always appear in the same set
order. Chapters 7 and 8 will teach you the eight question types in depth, but
for now, even just knowing their names gives you some insight as to what
you’ll be looking for or dealing with on each question.



                    The Eight Reading Question Types

         1. Vocabulary
         2. Purpose
         3. Dual Texts
         4. Retrieval
         5. Main Idea
         6. Claims
         7. Charts
         8. Conclusions


Soon enough, you’ll be an expert on all of these, but for now, let’s learn the
basic approach you’ll use regardless of question type.


       Not every question type shows up on every RW module, but
       you need to prepare for all of them. You won’t know which
       ones will be excluded from your module, and types that don’t
       appear on your first RW module will very likely appear on
       your second one!



Basic Approach for Reading Questions
 1. Read the Question. As with all Reading and Writing questions, you
    need to first understand what you are being asked to do before you dive
    into any text.

 2. Identify the Question Type. Each question has a phrase that indicates a
    very specific task that you are being asked to accomplish for that
    question. This also affects how you will adapt the rest of the approach
    and is a chance to apply your POOD: you may want to mark question
    types you’d rather deal with later or use LOTD on question types you’d
    rather not tackle at all.

 3. Read the Text(s). Read the text(s) thoroughly, keeping the question task
    in mind. Remember: you are looking for an answer to the question, or at
    the very least, evidence that can help answer the question. You don’t
    need to memorize, or even understand, every detail!
 4. Highlight What Can Help (and Annotate If Needed). Within the text,
    you’ll want to highlight a phrase or sentence that can help answer the
    question. It could be a direct answer to the question or a piece of
    information that the question wants you to do something with. On certain
    question types, such as Vocabulary or Purpose, you’ll also make an
    annotation that will help you nail the correct answer.

 5. Use POE. Eliminate anything that isn’t consistent with what you
    highlighted and/or annotated. Don’t necessarily try to find the right
    answer immediately, because there is a good chance you won’t see
    anything that you like (and an answer that you like immediately may be a
    trap). If you can eliminate answers that you know are wrong, though,
    you’ll be closer to the right answer. If you can’t eliminate three answers
    with your highlights and annotation, use the POE criteria (which we’ll
    talk about later in this chapter).

                 “Where the Money Is”
                 A reporter once asked notorious thief Willie Sutton
                 why he robbed banks. Legend has it that his answer
                 was, “Because that’s where the money is.” While
                 reading comprehension is much safer and more
                 productive than larceny, the same principle applies.
                 Concentrate on the questions and answer choices
                 because that’s where the points are. The text is just
                 a place for the test-writers to stash facts and details.
                 You’ll find them when you need to.



STEPS OF THE BASIC APPROACH
You might be surprised to see that we don’t recommend reading the text until
Step 3 of the Basic Approach. This is part of what we call active reading, an
essential skill for standardized texts. You shouldn’t read the text until you
know exactly what you are trying to find. Said another way, you want to
know your destination before you start the journey.
On the following page is a sample text and question stem for a Purpose
question, one of the eight question types we mentioned previously. We’ve
removed the four answer choices so you can focus on learning the steps one
piece at a time, but have no fear: you’ll deal with them soon enough. Skip
over the text for now and go right into Applying the Steps.

  1.      Mark for Review
       The following text is adapted from J.M. Barrie’s 1911 short story “The
       Inconsiderate Waiter.” The narrator, an upper-class gentleman, is
       describing his waiter, William, at a dining club that the gentleman
       frequents.

       Until William forced his affairs upon me that was all I did know
       of the private life of waiters, though I have been in the club for
       twenty years. I was even unaware whether they slept downstairs
       or had their own homes; nor had I the interest to inquire of other
       members, nor they the knowledge to inform me. I hold that this
       sort of people should be fed and clothed and given airing and
       wives and children, and I subscribe yearly, I believe for these
       purposes; but to come into closer relation with waiters is bad
       form; they are club fittings, and William should have kept his
       distress to himself, or taken it away and patched it up like a rent
       in one of the chairs.

       Which choice best states the main purpose of the text?


APPLYING THE STEPS



Step 1: Read the Question
It may be tempting to dive right into the text, but if you do so, you are not
reading actively. Remember that active reading requires that you read with a
purpose: you need to know what you are looking for in the text before you
read it. Also, slow down and read the task carefully. Each Reading question
gives an incredibly specific task, and it’s dangerous to assume they all
simply want some detail from the text. Lastly, it’s from this step that you will
be able to identify the question type, which affects how you are going to
adapt the rest of the approach.

Which choice best states the main purpose of the text?

                 Reading Basic Approach
                 1. Read the Question.




Step 2: Identify the Question Type
Each Reading question has a word, phrase, or series of phrases that indicates
which type of question it is. Each question type has several different formats
in which it can be asked, so familiarizing yourself with those formats through
these chapters is critical to making you an ace identifier.

For instance, the question above clearly asks for the main purpose of the
text. If a question says purpose, overall structure, or function, it’s what we
call a Purpose question. Once you have finished working through the Purpose
Questions lesson, you’ll be able to apply the appropriate strategy for this
question type. For now, all you need to know is that if a question is asking for
a main purpose, it’s asking why the author wrote the text.

The important thing to understand is that answers to Purpose questions, as
with all question types, must come—you guessed it—from the text itself. So,
on to the next step!
        Step 2 and POOD: Identifying the question type is your first
        opportunity to use your POOD: if this question type has
        caused you difficulty in the past, consider Marking for
        Review or entering your Letter of the Day.



                  Reading Basic Approach
                  1. Read the Question.
                  2. Identify the Question Type.




Step 3: Read the Text(s)
With the exception of one question type which we will see a bit later, all
Digital SAT question types have exactly one text attached to each question. If
the text is sourced from an existing novel, short story, or poem, it will have a
citation preceding it like the one we see in our example:

      The following text is adapted from J.M. Barrie’s 1911 short
      story “The Inconsiderate Waiter.” The narrator, an upper-class
      gentleman, is describing his waiter, William, at a dining club that
      the gentleman frequents.

Start by reading this citation, or blurb, if there is one. It will identify the type
of literature you’re dealing with and exactly how old it is. Also, College
Board will usually provide a sentence of descriptive information because the
writers are well aware they are throwing you into the deep end of the
unfamiliar story pool. You can use this to gain a small piece of insight before
tackling a sometimes-dense piece of literature.
        Step 3 and POOD: This is your second opportunity to apply
        your POOD. If there is a blurb and it references a particularly
        complex work or old poem that you’ll be reading, this could
        be the right time to mark and move on or even LOTD with
        very little time lost.


Then, it’s time to read the text itself. But remember that you want to be an
active reader. You are not reading the text for pleasure or because the Digital
SAT is so, so fun. You are reading only because it’s necessary in order to
accomplish the specific task of determining, in this case, why the author
wrote the text, which means you are looking for both the topic the author
wants to discuss and any feelings or motivations the author has regarding that
topic.

      Until William forced his affairs upon me that was all I did know
      of the private life of waiters, though I have been in the club for
      twenty years. I was even unaware whether they slept downstairs
      or had their own homes; nor had I the interest to inquire of other
      members, nor they the knowledge to inform me. I hold that this
      sort of people should be fed and clothed and given airing and
      wives and children, and I subscribe yearly, I believe for these
      purposes; but to come into closer relation with waiters is bad
      form; they are club fittings, and William should have kept his
      distress to himself, or taken it away and patched it up like a rent
      in one of the chairs.



        Step 3 and POOD, revisited: This is your third opportunity
        to apply your POOD. If you are reading the text and your eyes
        start to glaze over, you find yourself rereading one particular
        sentence because it’s so involved, or the text is simply
        confusing to you, it may be time to mark and move on.



                 Reading Basic Approach
                 1. Read the Question.
                 2. Identify the Question Type.
                 3. Read the Text(s).




Step 4: Highlight What Can Help (and Annotate If
Needed)
As you read the text, you want to be reading with both your eyes and your
mouse. Keep your cursor near the text or even use it to guide your eyes. The
instant you find something that either answers the question directly or helps
answer the question, highlight it and click the “Annotate” button in the top-
right corner of your screen. In this case, you should identify that the main idea
of the text was to discuss the narrator’s changing knowledge of his waiter
William’s life.

      Until William forced his affairs upon me that was all I did know
      of the private life of waiters, though I have been in the club for
      twenty years. I was even unaware whether they slept downstairs
      or had their own homes; nor had I the interest to inquire of other
      members, nor they the knowledge to inform me. I hold that this
      sort of people should be fed and clothed and given airing and
      wives and children, and I subscribe yearly, I believe for these
      purposes; but to come into closer relation with waiters is bad
      form; they are club fittings, and William should have kept his
      distress to himself, or taken it away and patched it up like a rent
      in one of the chairs.
This isn’t the complete story, however. The narrator here does not just want
to inform us of what he used to know about waiters’ lives and what he knows
now. You also need to highlight any attitude the narrator displays towards
this main idea.

      Until William forced his affairs upon me that was all I did know
      of the private life of waiters, though I have been in the club for
      twenty years. I was even unaware whether they slept downstairs
      or had their own homes; nor had I the interest to inquire of other
      members, nor they the knowledge to inform me. I hold that this
      sort of people should be fed and clothed and given airing and
      wives and children, and I subscribe yearly, I believe for these
      purposes; but to come into closer relation with waiters is bad
      form; they are club fittings, and William should have kept his
      distress to himself, or taken it away and patched it up like a rent
      in one of the chairs.

The negative words forced, bad form, and distress indicate that the narrator
is not at all pleased to know more about his waiter than he did before.

Since you wouldn’t actually spend time removing previous highlighting, the
final text looks something like this:

      Until William forced his affairs upon me that was all I did know
      of the private life of waiters, though I have been in the club for
      twenty years. I was even unaware whether they slept downstairs
      or had their own homes; nor had I the interest to inquire of other
      members, nor they the knowledge to inform me. I hold that this
      sort of people should be fed and clothed and given airing and
      wives and children, and I subscribe yearly, I believe for these
      purposes; but to come into closer relation with waiters is bad
      form; they are club fittings, and William should have kept his
      distress to himself, or taken it away and patched it up like a rent
      in one of the chairs.
Not every question requires this much highlighting, and more than one
sentence may point to the main idea of a text or attitude of an author. You only
need to find one of each to handle a Purpose question like this one.

Now, it’s time to annotate. Not every question type requires an annotation,
but on Purpose questions, it’s helpful. Since authors rarely state their purpose
directly, it’s a great idea to jot down a summary of the main idea and attitude
once you’ve found them. A good purpose annotation for this text would be:




Note how annotations should not be elaborate or particularly long—you
don’t want to spend too much time effectively rewriting the passage. You
want a quick summary that you can compare the answers to in the next step.
Nothing you typed in the box is new—it’s a direct summary of what you
highlighted in the text.


        Step 4 and POOD: Unlike with the other steps, failing to
        find evidence in a question isn’t necessarily a reason to mark
        and move on. If you understand the text well but cannot settle
        on the right evidence in an efficient manner, consider going to
        the answers and using POE.
                 Reading Basic Approach
                 1. Read the Question.
                 2. Identify the Question Type.
                 3. Read the Text(s).
                 4. Highlight What Can Help (and Annotate If
                    Needed).




Step 5: Use POE
Once you have your highlighting and, for this question type, your annotation,
it’s time to head to the answers. When looking at the answers, remember to
constantly ask this question.


        Is this answer consistent with my highlighting and annotation?
                         Yes, no, maybe, or no idea?


It’s not a matter of an answer sounding good or you liking an answer. Nor is
it a good idea to ask whether the answer “matches the text”: while the ideas
between text and answer will agree, the words will often be very different,
as the person who wrote the text and the person who wrote the question and
answers may not be the same person and may not write the same way. You
took the time in Steps 2–4 to figure out what you were being asked and to
find an answer to that question: use the tool you created for yourself and
don’t undersell your own abilities right at the end of the task. Let’s see those
answers one at a time.

        A To define a distinction between William and the other
          waiters at the dining club
Is this answer consistent with your highlighting and annotation? No, it’s not.
The words “William,” “waiters,” and “dining club” are all what we called
Recycled Language—these words are grabbed directly from the text and
thrown into an answer but not used the same way the text used them. These
answers may trap students who only seek to match words on the Digital SAT.

In this case, no distinction between William and the other waiters at the
dining club is given in the text. It may be tempting to say that because the
narrator knows something about William that he would rather not know, that’s
a distinction. However, the text would need to actually say that William is
different from other waiters somehow—you should not need to apply outside
steps of logic to make connections between the text and the answer choice.

At this point, we’d strike out (A) using the Answer Eliminator tool and move
on to the next answer.

        B To examine the type of service that the narrator most highly
          values

Is this answer consistent with your highlighting and annotation? No, it’s not.
All you know from the text is that the narrator wants waiters to wait on him
and doesn’t want to know about their private lives. The text offers no
indication as to what type of service the narrator most highly values, which
is what we call Extreme Language. These traps typically include a word or
phrase beyond what the text can support.

Believe it or not, most highly values can be eliminated for another reason!
Valuing something is a positive emotion; it means we hold an idea or person
in certain esteem and are grateful for it. However, the emotions you
highlighted in the text (forced, distress, bad form) were entirely negative. So,
the emotions presented in (B) are the Opposite of those in the text. Answers
may express a conflicting attitude, tone, or meaning to the text, and often a
single one of those opposite words is enough to eliminate an answer.
At this point, we’d strike out (B) using the Answer Eliminator and move on
to the next answer.

        C To demonstrate the narrator’s disappointment with the
          dining club for hiring William

Is this answer consistent with your highlighting and annotation? No, it’s not.
Some answers can start so well and go so, so wrong. This answer is Half-
Right: the narrator is 100% disappointed by something…but his
disappointment is not directed at the dining club for hiring William.
Because exams like the Digital SAT are stressful, it’s easy to read part of an
answer and be tempted to just choose it so you can move on. Force yourself
to read all the way to the end of the answer, because that’s where the trap in a
Half-Right answer will often lie.

Half-Right answers usually rely on one of the other traps to make up the
flawed half of the answer. In this case, this answer could be seen as
Recycled Language or Could Be True. In fact, these traps often appear
together in the same answer. The words dining club and William both appear
in the text, but William’s hiring is never mentioned in the text. Yet, the
answer seems tempting because it’s very logical to assume that the narrator is
upset about William’s hiring: after all, he certainly believes he now knows
things about William that he really shouldn’t know about his waiter. Again,
you would need textual support for that conclusion, and you don’t have it.

At this point, you’d strike out (C) using the Answer Eliminator and move on
to the next answer. You still need to evaluate (D) even if it’s the only answer
remaining and not simply choose it because it’s the last answer standing. An
answer on the Digital SAT is correct only because it’s supported by the text,
so (D) must be treated the same as the other answers. We’ll discuss POE in
greater detail later in these chapters.
        D To express the narrator’s strong emotions towards
          professional boundaries

Is this answer consistent with your highlighting and annotation? Yes, it’s
fairly consistent. The narrator believes it is bad form to come into closer
relation with waiters and that William should have kept his distress to
himself. This is fairly consistent with our annotation box as well, which
stated, “knows more about waiter now – unhappy about it.” Notice how the
answer doesn’t use the same words as the text nor does it use the same words
as our annotation—it almost never will. However, it does express all of the
correct ideas. The narrator does indeed have strong emotions towards
professional boundaries and feels that they have been crossed with what the
narrator now knows about William’s private life. Even if this is not how you
would personally phrase the text’s main purpose, this answer is fully
supported by the text and shouldn’t be eliminated.

You keep this answer in play. Since all three of the other answers are crossed
out and (D) remains because it is supported by the text, you can now
confidently click on (D) as the answer.

        A To define a distinction between William and the other
          waiters at the dining club

        B To examine the type of service that the narrator most highly
          values

        C To demonstrate the narrator’s disappointment with the
          dining club for hiring William

        D To express the narrator’s strong emotions towards
          professional boundaries
         The point of the highlighting and annotation isn’t to confirm
         or justify any particular answer—it’s to eliminate the three
         answers with clear flaws and leave the correct, supported
               answer in play until the end of the POE process.



                 Reading Basic Approach
                 1. Read the Question.
                 2. Identify the Question Type.
                 3. Read the Text(s).
                 4. Highlight What Can Help (and Annotate If
                    Needed).
                 5. Use POE.



POE CRITERIA
On many questions, you’ll be able to eliminate three of the four answers
simply by using your highlights and annotation. On more difficult questions,
however, you’ll get rid of one or two answer choices, and then you’ll need to
consider the remaining answers a little more carefully. If you’ve narrowed it
down to two answer choices and they both seem to make sense, you’re
probably down to the right answer and a trap answer. Luckily, we know
some common traps that the test-writers use, and they include the following:

    Recycled Language: These answer choices repeat exact words and
    phrases from the text but put the words together to say something that the
    text didn’t actually say. They often establish relationships between the
    words and phrases that do not exist in the text.

    Could Be True: These answers might initially look good because they
    make sense or seem logical based on outside reasoning, but they lack
    support within the text itself.
    Extreme Language: These answers look just about perfect except for a
    word or phrase that goes too far beyond what the text can support. This
    also includes answers that could be called insulting or offensive to a
    person or a group.

    Right Answer, Wrong Question: These answer choices are true based
    on the text, but they don’t answer the question that was asked. For
    example, they might state what the author said when the question was
    asking why the author said it.

    Opposite: These answer choices use a single word or phrase that make
    the answer convey a tone, viewpoint, or meaning not intended by the
    author. This can include a word such as not in the answer or a negative
    vocabulary word when the tone of the text was positive.

    Half-Right: These answers address part of but not the entire question
    task. They can also have one half of the answer address the question
    perfectly and the other half contain at least one of the traps mentioned
    previously.

Being aware of these traps will help you spot them on the Digital SAT and
therefore avoid them. In the previous question, (A) contained Recycled
Language, (B) contained Extreme Language and an emotion Opposite of
the narrator’s emotion in the text, and (C) was Half-Right, with language in
the second half of the answer that could be called Recycled Language or a
Could Be True trap.

Keep in mind that not every answer fits perfectly into a trap category—
sometimes an answer is simply not supported by the text or wasn’t mentioned
by the author. The best time to apply these criteria, as we said before, is
when you’re down to two or three answers after you’ve compared each
answer to what you highlighted and annotated.
Summary
 The Reading questions on the Digital SAT make up approximately 50
 percent of your RW section score.

 Reading questions are presented in order of question type and then in
 order of difficulty within the question type. Don’t be afraid to skip a
 hard question, and don’t worry if you can’t answer every question.

 Use your POOD to pick up the points you can get, and don’t forget
 LOTD on the rest!

 The Reading questions are open-book questions! Use that to your
 advantage by focusing only on the evidence within the text that is key to
 answering the questions.

 Highlight the answer in the text and annotate if necessary before you look
 at the answer choices.

 Use POE to eliminate answers that are not consistent with the answer
 you found in the text.

 If you have more than one answer left after you eliminate the ones that do
 not match the text, compare the remaining answer choices and decide
 whether any of them are trap answers:
      Recycled Language
      Could Be True
      Extreme Language
      Right Answer, Wrong Question
      Opposite
      Half-Right
Chapter 7
Reading Question Types 1–3: Craft
and Structure
In this chapter, we’ll take a look at the first three question types you will see
on the RW section. Each of the question types in this chapter focuses on the
construction of the text itself: the correct vocabulary word for a sentence, the
purpose or function of the text, or how two different texts regarding the same
topic interact with each other. For each type, we’ll show how the Basic
Approach can be adapted to maximize your score.
VOCABULARY
The first group of questions you will see will ask you to choose an
appropriate vocabulary word to fill in a blank or determine what the meaning
of a word is in the context of the paragraph that the word is in. The Digital
SAT tests a blend of common words with multiple meanings and slightly
more advanced vocabulary words on harder questions, but the important
thing to remember is that the context of the sentence(s) surrounding the word
will provide a clue that you can highlight. This will allow you to annotate, or
write down, your own word for the blank, which will help you with POE.
Let’s see how to adapt the Basic Approach for Vocabulary questions.

 1. Read the Question.

 2. Identify the Question Type. If you see “most logical or precise word
    or phrase” or “most nearly mean,” you have a Vocabulary question that is
    asking you what word would best fill a blank or define a word in
    context.

 3. Read the Text. As you read, focus particularly on the sentence
    containing the blank or word itself—your clue for the next step will
    often come from that sentence.

 4. Highlight What Can Help and Annotate. Within the text, you’ll want to
    highlight a phrase or sentence that provides a clue for the type of word
    that can go in the blank (or, if a word is already present, what word
    could replace it). Then, based on the clue, you’ll want to write down
    your own word in your annotation box.

 5. Use POE. The most common traps on a Vocabulary question are Could
    Be True (common definitions of the original word or words that seem
    logical based on other parts of the text), Extreme Language (words that
    go too far in the positive or negative direction), and Opposite (words
    that convey the opposite tone of the one used by the author or a
    character). You’ll see these as we work through some examples.
  1.      Mark for Review
       Kuei-Chih Lee’s landscape artistry can best be described as
       __________ : his large-format installations make use of raw materials
       collected on-site in order to blend his created work with the natural
       environment.

       Which choice completes the text with the most logical and precise
       word or phrase?

         A beautiful

         B harmonious

         C jarring

         D acclaimed


Here’s How to Crack It
As you Read the Question, you can also Identify the Question Type as
Vocabulary when you see the phrase “most logical and precise word or
phrase.” The vast majority of Vocabulary questions are phrased identically to
the question you see above (we’ll see the less common format in just a bit).
So, you now know that you need a word to fit in the blank.

Next up, you Read the Text. Most Vocabulary texts tend to be on the shorter
side (25–50 words), but they can be longer, especially if they are quoting a
literature source. As you read, you’ll want to understand what type of word
should go where your blank is—in this case, you’re looking for some
adjective to describe Lee’s artistry.

Then, it’s time to Highlight a clue in the text that can help you understand
what should go in the blank. The blank describes Lee’s artistry, and the text
elsewhere states that Lee uses raw materials collected on-site in order to
blend his created work with the natural environment. Based on this, a good
word to write in your Annotation box to describe Lee’s style of art would be
“blended” or “merged.”

Lastly, it’s time to Use POE. Let’s consider these answers one at a time.

Choice (A) should be eliminated because beautiful is a Could Be True trap
answer. While both artistry and the natural environment are often beautiful,
the text here would need to describe them as so, and it does not! You should
always eliminate answers that can only be supported by outside knowledge
or assumptions but not by the text itself.

Choice (B) should be kept because harmonious is a good synonym for
“blended” or “merged.” Your word may not be a direct synonym for the
correct answer, but as long as it’s along the same lines of meaning, it will do
the job of eliminating most of the wrong answers and leaving you, hopefully,
with just one answer remaining.

Choice (C) should be eliminated because jarring is the Opposite meaning of
“blended.” The text never states that Lee’s final productions look disjointed
or disconnected in any way.

Choice (D) should be eliminated because the passage never describes Lee or
his work as acclaimed. This is a Could Be True trap as it’s logical to
assume an artist is well-known or highly regarded, but looking back at the
text, there isn’t a single word that describes Lee’s popularity or renown.

With three answers eliminated and only (B) remaining, select (B) and
congratulate yourself on a job well done!



By the way, it’s pretty reasonable to have had (A), (D), or even (C) still
remaining after the initial POE pass, so that’s where we’d start asking,
“Which of my remaining answers is a trap?” On harder questions, answers
may also survive that first pass because you are unsure of what the word
means, which means that word becomes a Greatest Hits word for you.
More information about the Greatest Hits can be found in Chapter 9!

Vocabulary (The Second Format)
Some questions that test vocabulary won’t have a blank. Instead, the question
will ask what a word or phrase in the text “most nearly mean(s).” The Basic
Approach for Vocabulary works equally well even if a word is provided
instead of a blank—you’ll highlight a clue in the text and then write down
your own word, treating the word given as if it weren’t there. Do not give in
to the temptation to simply pick an answer without following all of the steps
—Could Be True traps are even more prevalent when a word is already
included, as College Board will create one or more answers that are
common definitions of the indicated word but don’t fit the context. Writing
down your own word is the most foolproof, stress-free way of not falling for
those traps!




  2.      Mark for Review
       The following text is adapted from Thomas Love Peacock’s 1818 novel
       Nightmare Abbey. Marionetta, a young woman, is reflecting on her
       relationship with a young man named Scythrop.

       Scythrop grew every day more reserved, mysterious, and
       distrait; and gradually lengthened the duration of his diurnal
       seclusions in his tower. Marionetta thought she perceived in all
       this very manifest symptoms of a warm love cooling.

       As used in the text, what does the word “reserved” most nearly mean?

         A Agreeable
        B Observant

        C Withdrawn

        D Hostile


Here’s How to Crack It
As you Read the Question, you can also Identify the Question Type as
Vocabulary when you see the phrase “most nearly mean.” While this format is
less common, it can be handled the exact same way as the other Vocabulary
questions. Treat the word reserved as if it were a blank and follow the same
Vocabulary Basic Approach.

Next up, you Read the Text. As you read, you’ll want to understand what
type of word should go in the “blank.” You’re looking for some adjective that
describes Scythrop.

Then, it’s time to Highlight a clue in the text that helps you understand what
word should go in the “blank” you created. Scythrop is already described in
the list as mysterious and is said to have gradually lengthened the duration
of his diurnal seclusions in the tower. Marionetta also describes this
behavior as symptoms of a warm love cooling. All of these clues suggest that
a good phrase to Annotate would be “less available” or “not around as
much.” Sometimes, a single perfect word for the blank won’t immediately
come to you, so using a phrase is perfectly acceptable!

Lastly, it’s time to Use POE, which should always be part of your test-taking
vocabulary.

Choice (A) should be eliminated because it’s the Opposite tone of “less
available.” Agreeable would describe Scythrop positively, but “less
available” is a more negative idea.
Choice (B) should be eliminated because observant is a Right Answer,
Wrong Question trap. Marionetta could be described as observant, as she
perceived and drew conclusions from Scythrop’s behavior, but the question
is looking for a description of Scythrop, not Marionetta.

Choice (C) should be kept because it’s a good synonym for “less available”
or “not around as much.”

Choice (D) should be eliminated because it’s Extreme Language. Nothing
in the text suggests that Scythrop has become hostile to Marionetta or anyone
else around him, just that he’s spending more time alone.

With three answers eliminated and only (C) remaining, you select (C) and
hope Marionetta and Scythrop can work things out, but we’ve got more
Digital SAT business to attend to.




         The Vocabulary Bottom Line: You MUST write down your
         own word in the annotation box. It’s the best way to avoid
                             falling for traps!



Studying Vocabulary
Vocabulary is one of the most common Reading question types on the Digital
SAT—it’s not uncommon for it to make up 4–8 of the Reading questions you
see within each module. This is important for a few reasons. First of all,
that’s a significant number of points for your RW score considering there are
only 27 questions in each RW module. Second, this is one of the few spots
where College Board’s order of difficulty is helpful. Recall that questions
increase in difficulty as they go on, so you’ll notice the words and texts get
slightly more difficult as you go, especially if you have 7–8 Vocabulary
questions. As your score increases, you’ll likely start encountering the harder
second RW module, so you’ll need some word knowledge to keep things
moving along swimmingly. While there are many ways to study vocab, we’ve
provided three of them below and encourage you to use all three of them,
especially if you are pursuing the highest possible score.

Method 1: Use the Greatest Hits in Chapter 9 of this book. In Chapter 9,
you’ll find a list of the 60 most common words we’ve seen on past exams,
along with the primary textbook definition for each. These words are not
meant to be a complete list, as College Board uses a large variety of words
on the Digital SAT. However, the words on the list provide a great starting
point for sharpening your vocabulary skills as you explore the Digital SAT
more deeply.

Method 2: Create Your Own Greatest Hits. Throughout these chapters,
you’ll come across words in the text and answers that you may not know, and
sometimes this will even happen on non-Vocabulary questions. Create a
physical or digital document to track these words. Whenever you encounter a
word you’re unfamiliar with on a practice Digital SAT question, add it to the
list, along with a definition for how it was used on that question, and,
optionally, a mnemonic device to help you remember that word. For
example, the word paucity, which means scarcity or a lack of something,
could be remembered by thinking of a pauper, or beggar.

Method 3: Read One Challenging Article/Short Story Per Day.
Publications such as Forbes, National Geographic, The Economist, and The
New Yorker typically publish articles with reading levels equal to and, in
many cases, higher than those of the Digital SAT’s texts. Additionally, many
Digital SAT texts are excerpts from novels, poems, and short stories written
in the 1800s and early 1900s. The Century Past Free Online Library is a
great website to find such texts.
By reading one such article or story per day as often as your schedule
allows, you’ll not only be exposed to difficult words that are often
understandable through context, but you’ll also train yourself to better sort
through some of the more sophisticated Digital SAT texts as you look for the
correct evidence to answer the question.


                 Generally, you don’t want to add difficult words from
                 poems or literature sources to your Greatest Hits
                 (such as distrait, diurnal, or manifest from the
                 previous question). These texts may feature
                 antiquated or difficult words, and since these texts
                 aren’t written by College Board, such words are not
                 likely to appear outside of the individual texts in
                 which you see them.



PURPOSE
The next question type will ask you why the author wrote the text or how a
sentence functions in the text. The Digital SAT doesn’t require any outside
reasoning on these questions either, as it’s not really possible to know why
any author does anything without asking them! Instead, Purpose questions are
looking for the most likely, best supported reason that the text or sentence
was written or included. You may see just one of these questions or several
of them, but in all cases, remember that the key is finding the evidence!

 1. Read the Question.

 2. Identify the Question Type. If you see the words purpose, function, or
    structure in the question stem, you have a Purpose question that is asking
    you why the text was written, why a sentence was included, or how the
    text is organized, respectively.

 3. Read the Text. As you read, focus particularly on sentence structure.
    Typically, each sentence within a text has a role within the paragraph.
  Understanding what each sentence does and how each sentence connects
  to the ones before and after it is key to the following step.

4. Highlight What Can Help and Annotate.

       If a question asks for the “main purpose” of the text, there is a main
       claim the author is making somewhere in the text—each sentence
       will in some way contribute to this claim. You want to find and
       highlight this claim!
       If a question asks for the “function” of a sentence, the sentences
       before and after the indicated sentence will reference ideas that the
       sentence in question interacts with. Highlighting ideas that persist
       across the sentence before, the sentence itself, and/or the sentence
       after will help you understand those connections.
       If a question asks for the “overall structure” of the text, it’s looking
       for a combination of the first two bullets. You’re still looking for the
       main claim the author is making, but you want to examine each
       sentence to see how that claim is supported. Look in particular to
       highlight words that show some type of chronology, comparison, or
       contrast between ideas.
       No matter what the prompt is, make sure to Annotate! Write down a
       simple description of WHY or HOW the author wrote the text or
       included a sentence. A good tip is to write down both the topic of
       the passage and any attitude the author seems to express towards that
       topic.

5. Use POE. The most common traps on a Purpose question will be
   answers that use Recycled Language (repeating words verbatim from
   the text but using those words differently from the text), Right Answer,
   Wrong Question traps (answers that are supported by the text but only
   describe the content of the text and not the author’s purpose in writing
   it), and Opposites (answers that express the opposite purpose or tone
   from what the author is trying to do).
  3.      Mark for Review
       In 1978, British biochemist Sir Philip Cohen was experimenting with a
       type of enzyme to understand how calcium activated that enzyme. He
       noticed a faint blue smear occurring at the bottom of the gel used in his
       experiments but had assumed it to be of little importance. After hearing
       another scientist’s lecture, Cohen realized that calmodulin, a calcium-
       binding protein, was the source of the blue smear. His next experiments
       confirmed that calmodulin still appeared in his gels even after the gels
       had been boiled and was therefore heat stable. He correctly concluded
       that calmodulin mediated the activity of calcium within the enzyme.

       Which choice best states the main purpose of the text?

         A To explain how misunderstood calmodulin is

         B To describe Cohen’s realization regarding calmodulin

         C To illustrate how calcium-binding proteins function

         D To place emphasis on the importance of calcium within
           enzymes


Here’s How to Crack It
As you Read the Question, you can also Identify the Question Type as
Purpose when you see the phrase “main purpose.” Yes, it’s sometimes that
straightforward. You know that you want to understand the main point the
author is making in this text.

Next up, you Read the Text. Remember—you’re not reading because it’s
fun. You are actively looking for the main purpose of the text. In general,
there are three purposes that most authors will seek to fulfill: inform,
persuade/argue, or entertain (the last of these, as we’re sure you’ll agree,
is pretty rare on the Digital SAT).

Then, it’s time to Highlight evidence that can help you understand the
author’s main purpose. The author focuses mainly on two ideas: British
biochemist Sir Philip Cohen and his connection to the protein calmodulin.
The critical statement to highlight that connects both of these ideas is Cohen
realized that calmodulin, a calcium-binding protein, was the source of the
blue smear. The text goes on to inform the reader of the relevance of this
discovery to Cohen’s experiments. Write in your Annotation box that the
purpose of the text is to “explain link between Cohen and calmodulin,” or
whatever shorthand or abbreviation makes sense to you.

It’s time to use POE. Let’s be purposeful as we compare these answers to
our annotation.

Choice (A) should be eliminated because it is Extreme Language: just
because Cohen himself didn’t immediately recognize the blue smear does not
mean that calmodulin is misunderstood by anyone to any notable extent.

Choice (B) should be kept because it’s fairly consistent with the highlighting
and annotation—this is exactly what the author does, just with different
words from those used in the text, as we’ve come to expect.

Choice (C) should be eliminated because it’s Half-Right: you do learn a
little about the role that one calcium-binding protein, calmodulin, performs,
but the answer doesn’t mention Cohen whatsoever. Too much of the text
focuses on Cohen and his work for him to not be part of the correct answer
regarding the main purpose of the text.

Choice (D) should be eliminated because it’s Recycled Language,
borrowing the phrase from calcium within enzymes almost verbatim from the
end of the passage. The answer focuses neither on Cohen nor calmodulin, so
it should be eliminated fairly quickly if you highlighted and annotated.
With three answers eliminated and only (B) remaining, you select (B) and
thank Sir Cohen for his tireless efforts as you continue your own efforts to
master this exam.



Purpose (Sentence Function)
The same approach can be used when a question asks how a sentence
functions in the text. Generally, if you focus on the sentences before and/or
after the indicated sentence, you’ll be able to highlight connections between
ideas that keep the sentences flowing logically. From this logical flow, you’ll
be able to annotate the role that the indicated sentence performs.




  4.      Mark for Review
       The following text is from Alexandre Dumas’s 1850 novel The Black
       Tulip. Cornelius, the main character, is in jail and is guarded by a
       turnkey, an older word for jailer.

       Cornelius saw nothing but the golden brocade cap, tipped with
       lace, such as the Frisian girls wore; he heard nothing but some
       one whispering into the ear of the turnkey. But the latter put his
       heavy keys into the white hand which was stretched out to
       receive them, and, descending some steps, sat down on the
       staircase which was thus guarded above by himself, and below
       by the dog. The head-dress turned round, and Cornelius beheld
       the face of Rosa, blanched with grief, and her beautiful eyes
       streaming with tears.

       Which choice best describes the function of the underlined sentence in
       the text as a whole?
        A It details the outcome of a conversation mentioned in the
           previous sentence.

        B It describes the specifics of the construction of the
           jailhouse.

        C It explains that an individual is debating his obligations to
           duty.

        D It introduces a claim that the following sentence further
           explains.




                               Watch Us Crack It



Here’s How to Crack It
As you Read the Question, you can also Identify the Question Type as
Purpose when you see the phrase “function.” Typically, the question will ask
for the function either of an underlined sentence or of a numbered sentence in
the text, such as the second or third sentence.

Next up, you Read the Text. Pay specific attention to not just the sentence
itself, but the sentences before and after. The ideas that repeat among these
three sentences form the core of what you should highlight in the next step.

So, it’s time to Highlight ideas that help you understand the sentence’s
function. The sentence before states that Cornelius heard nothing but some
one whispering into the ear of the turnkey. In the underlined sentence, the
turnkey put his heavy keys into the white hand of whoever was whispering
to him and then went to go sit down. In the sentence after, the person who
whispered turned round and was revealed to be Rosa, someone who is
clearly saddened by Cornelius’s situation in jail. With this, you can
Annotate the function of the sentence: “explain what happens after whisper.”

It’s time to Use POE and eliminate some dysfunctional answers.

Choice (A) should be kept because it’s fairly consistent with your
highlighting and annotation. It describes exactly what happens as a result of
Rosa’s whisper into the turnkey’s, or guard’s, ear.

Choice (B) should be eliminated because it’s Right Answer, Wrong
Question. You do learn a little bit about the layout of this particular floor of
the jail cell when the staircase is described, but based on the sentences
before and after, this isn’t the focus of the text as the other two sentences
don’t expand on this idea.

Choice (C) should be eliminated because there is no mention of any debate
that the guard is having. This answer is a Could Be True trap because you
would hope a jail guard would probably heavily debate handing his keys to
someone, but no mention of any such debate appears in the text.

Choice (D) should be eliminated because it’s Half-Right: the following
sentence does indeed further explain the action from the underlined sentence.
However, the underlined sentence doesn’t make any actual claim or state any
argument—it merely describes the action in the story.

With three answers eliminated and only (A) remaining, select (A) and hope
the guard keeps his job after his questionable lack of judgment.



You can also be asked for the overall structure of the text. Don’t panic! You
are still being asked for the purpose of the text as a whole. Once you write
down what the purpose is, the correct answer will describe what the author
did in the text to accomplish that goal. An example of one of these questions
is included in the Reading Drills chapter.


         The Purpose Bottom Line: You MUST remember that the
        question is looking for the most supported reason the author
         wrote something—the author will likely not directly state
                    “this is why I wrote this” in the story.



DUAL TEXTS
The next question type will offer you two texts rather than one and ask how
someone from the second text would respond to an idea, person, or group
from the first text. These can seem intimidating at first, but all you are
looking for is a single idea mentioned in the first text that is commented upon
by the second. It will be pretty obvious when you are faced with a Dual Texts
question (after all, there will be two texts!), so we’ll modify the Basic
Approach slightly to handle this unique question type.

 1. Read and Understand the Question. The presence of two texts will
    make it clear that this is a Dual Texts question, but it’s still critical to
    make sure exactly who or what you should be focusing on in each text.

 2. Read Text 1 and highlight the idea or viewpoint referenced in the
    question. As you read, remember that there was a specific hypothesis,
    statement, or claim that was referenced by the question. For Text 1, you
    pretty much just need to find and highlight that idea.

 3. Read Text 2 and highlight the main idea or viewpoint towards the
    same information from Text 1. Text 2 will typically feature an
    individual or group conducting an experiment or responding to the claim
    from Text 1 in some way. They could confirm the claim from Text 1,
    contradict it, or expand on it. Finding and highlighting the line or
  sentence in which Text 2 comments on the same idea that you highlighted
  from Text 1 is critical to understanding the connection between the texts.

4. Write the relationship between the texts down in your Annotation
   box. As stated before, this will typically be an agreement, disagreement,
   or explanation. More complex connections are possible, but it’s a fair
   bet that the second text will have one of those three reactions to the
   claim from the first!

5. Use POE and eliminate answers that are inconsistent with one or
   both texts. The most common trap answers on Dual Texts questions are
   Opposites (answers that take the opposite viewpoint that Text 2
   expresses, such as agreeing with Text 1 when Text 2 actually disagrees)
   and Extreme Language (answers that take a stated opinion or claim
   further than the relevant text can support).

                Remember POOD: you typically only get one Dual
                Texts question (if any) on each module, so if you’re
                concerned about the question being confusing or
                time-consuming, enter your LOTD and move on!




5.      Mark for Review
     Text 1

     Anxiety has long been considered a critical area of focus for those
     involved in both psychological analysis and behavior management. The
     traditional treatment for anxiety has been prescription medication. But
     what about situations when medication is ineffective or ill-advised?
     Psychologists continue to explore possible alternative treatments for
     anxiety to this day.
     Text 2
Professor Spike W.S. Lee and his team have demonstrated a possible
link between self-cleansing and anxiety reduction. They conducted a
study of 1,150 adults and showed each of them one of three different
videos: how to properly wash hands, how to properly peel an egg, and
how to properly draw a circle. The subjects were then all exposed to a
series of situations meant to induce anxiety. Those individuals who had
seen the handwashing video demonstrated consistently lower levels of
anxiety than those who had seen either of the other two videos.

Based on the texts, how would Lee and his team (Text 2) most likely
respond to the “traditional treatment” discussed in Text 1?

  A By noting that it may not be the only possible treatment by
    which an individual may reduce anxiety

  B By claiming that those who prescribe medication for anxiety
    completely ignore the emotional benefits of frequent
    handwashing

  C By stating that his team’s findings help establish
    handwashing as an alternative treatment to prescribed
    medication

  D By calling for other psychologists to focus their own efforts
    on how handwashing frequency increases with exposure to
    instructional videos




                         Watch Us Crack It
Here’s How to Crack It
First, Read and Understand the Question. You need to first find what Text
1 says about the traditional treatment and then find HOW Lee and his team
respond to it.

Next up, you Read Text 1 and look for what it says about the traditional
treatment. You can highlight that Text 1 states that the traditional treatment
for anxiety has been prescription medication. Then, you need to Read Text
2 and find Lee and his team’s reply to this idea. The opening sentence of the
text states that Lee and his team have demonstrated a possible link between
self-cleansing and behavior management. The text goes on to say that those
who had seen the handwashing video demonstrated consistently lower
levels of anxiety than those who had seen either of the other two videos.
These lines don’t address prescription medication directly, but instead offer
a different way someone may possibly reduce anxiety.

So, that becomes what you Annotate: write “Text 2 offers other possible
method” in the annotation box. As with Purpose questions, try to keep these
annotations short and sweet so you avoid straying too far from what the
passage states—you are merely writing down exactly what Lee and his team
did and nothing further.

Lastly, it’s time to Use POE. One text, Dual Texts? It doesn’t matter: three of
the four answers won’t be consistent with the claim and response that you
Highlighted and Annotated.

Choice (A) should be kept because it’s fairly consistent with our highlighting
and annotation. Lee and his team do suggest an alternative possible treatment
for reducing anxiety rather than prescription medication.

Choice (B) should be eliminated because it’s Extreme Language. While
Text 1 doesn’t mention handwashing as a treatment for anxiety, the phrase
completely ignores goes too far—there is no evidence that those who
prescribe medication don’t consider handwashing to be emotionally
beneficial.

Choice (C) should be eliminated because it’s also Extreme Language.
Lee’s findings don’t establish handwashing as an alternative treatment to
prescribed medication. All Lee and his team’s findings do is offer some
evidence that self-cleansing, or at least watching videos about handwashing,
may reduce anxiety levels. Much more work would need to be done for
handwashing to be established as a true alternative. Keep an eye out for
words like established or proved—these words often go too far even if they
are not as obviously extreme as words like completely or only.

Choice (D) should be eliminated because it’s Recycled Language.
Handwashing and videos are taken directly from the passage, but the words
around them are not supported. Nowhere in Text 2 do Lee and his team call
for other psychologists to do anything. As logical as it is that Lee and his
team may want other scientists to investigate this possible alternative
treatment method, the text never includes any such call to action (making this
also a Could Be True trap).

With three answers eliminated and only (A) remaining, you select (A) and
have taken a crucial step towards reducing your own anxiety on Dual Texts
questions.




        The Dual Texts Bottom Line: Keep the question in mind—if
        you remember that both texts will address the same claim or
        idea in some way and find that claim referenced both times,
                      that’s a major accomplishment.
Summary
 Always come up with your own word and phrase on Vocabulary
 questions and write it down in the annotation box before looking at the
 answer choices.

 Study vocabulary by using the Greatest Hits in Chapter 9, creating your
 own Greatest Hits, and reading challenging articles or older short
 stories, excerpts from novels, and poems.

 Make sure you are consistently finding the main claim the author makes
 in the text for Purpose questions.

 Identify the claim/idea/hypothesis that both texts reference on Dual Texts
 questions. That is the best way to identify the link between the two texts.

 For all three of these question types, annotation is critical. Make sure
 you’ve written down a word, purpose, or relationship in the Annotation
 box to help you apply POE.

 Don’t forget POOD and LOTD. If the words in a Vocabulary question
 are too confusing or a Purpose or Dual Texts question looks too dense or
 time-consuming, consider marking the question for review. Use your
 LOTD on questions you are not sure you’ll make it back to.
Chapter 8
Reading Question Types 4–8:
Information and Ideas
In this chapter, we’ll take a look at the final five Reading question types you
will see on the RW section. Each of the question types in this chapter focuses
on the information presented in the text (or chart, as you’ll see). These
questions can ask you to find relevant information, find a main idea, find or
support a claim, work with data in a table or graph, or choose a concluding
sentence for the text. For each type, we’ll show how the Basic Approach can
be adapted to maximize your score.
RETRIEVAL
After Dual Texts, the next group of questions will switch up the focus of the
Reading section. These questions, called Retrieval questions, ask you what
the text says that would be an answer to the question—you won’t need to
determine why the author included the information or how someone else
would respond to it. On Retrieval questions, you’ll often be able to go right
to POE once you highlight the answer in the text. With that in mind, let’s
examine the Basic Approach for Retrieval questions.

 1. Read the Question.

 2. Identify the Question Type. If you see the words according to the text
    or based on the text in the question stem, you have a Retrieval question
    that is asking you WHAT the text said. The question could ask for many
    different types of details, such as why or how something happens, but
    these details will be something you can definitively find in the text each
    time.

 3. Read the Text. As you read, focus on the person, place, or thing
    referenced in the question. You are looking for some detail about that
    person, place, or thing that will answer the question.

 4. Highlight What Can Help. This is one of the most straightforward
    question types—you want to highlight what the text actually offers as an
    answer to the question. Bear in mind that straightforward doesn’t
    necessarily mean easy—you’ll still need to read carefully and avoid
    highlighting details irrelevant to the question task.

 5. Use POE. The most common traps on a Retrieval question will be
    answers that use Recycled Language (repeating words verbatim from
    the text but using those words differently from the text), Could Be True
    trap answers based on making outside assumptions not supported by the
    text, and Extreme Language answers that go beyond what the text
    states.
  1.      Mark for Review
       The following is adapted from George Eliot’s 1871 novel
       Middlemarch. The author is describing Dorothea Brooke, one of the
       central characters in the novel.

       It had now entered Dorothea’s mind that Mr. Casaubon might
       wish to make her his wife, and the idea that he would do so
       touched her with a sort of reverential gratitude. How good of
       him—nay, it would be almost as if a winged messenger had
       suddenly stood beside her path and held out his hand towards
       her! For a long while she had been oppressed by the
       indefiniteness which hung in her mind, like a thick summer haze,
       over all her desire to make her life greatly effective.

       According to the text, what is true about Dorothea?

         A She is skeptical of Mr. Casaubon’s career as a messenger.

         B She wants to know Mr. Casaubon’s feelings towards
            summer.

         C She is enthused by the prospect of marriage to a particular
            individual.

         D She prefers marriage over other types of relationships.


Here’s How to Crack It
As you Read the Question, you can also Identify the Question Type as
Retrieval when you see the phrase according to the text.

Next up, you Read the Text. As you read, have your mouse ready to
highlight what the text actually says about Dorothea.
The very first sentence, which you should Highlight, says that it had now
entered Dorothea’s mind that Mr. Casaubon might wish to make her his
wife, and the idea that he would do so touched her with a sort of
reverential gratitude. The next two sentences pretty much double down on
having Dorothea ponder how much better her life will be if she becomes Mr.
Casaubon’s wife. Simply stated, the best answer will be as consistent as
possible with that opening sentence, and the three wrong answers will have
some flaw that makes them inconsistent.

It’s time to Use POE. Three of these four answers won’t be consistent with
what we retrieved from the text.

Choice (A) should be eliminated for multiple reasons. First, skeptical is the
Opposite tone of reverential gratitude, which is positive. Second,
messenger is Recycled Language—the text doesn’t state that Mr.
Casaubon’s career is that of a messenger. Instead, it uses winged messenger
as part of a description for how good Dorothea believes Mr. Casaubon’s
proposal of marriage would be for her.

Choice (B) should be eliminated because it’s also Recycled Language.
Thick summer haze is used in the text to describe Dorothea’s negative mental
state before realizing that Mr. Casaubon might propose and has nothing to do
with Mr. Casaubon’s feelings towards summer as a season.

Choice (C) should be kept because it’s consistent with the positive emotions
towards the proposal that you highlighted in the opening sentence.

Choice (D) should be eliminated because it is a Could Be True trap answer.
Dorothea is certainly excited by the prospect of marriage, but the text doesn’t
give any information regarding any other types of relationships Dorothea
might be considering and which type of relationship would be her
preference.
With three answers eliminated and only (C) remaining, select (C) and hope
that Dorothea and Mr. Casaubon experience a long, happy life together. Or,
just move on to the next question type.




        The Retrieval Bottom Line: According to the text or based
        on the text means that the text needs to provide the answer to
        the question. Don’t overthink or try to make deductions from
        what you read. Compare the answer you find in the text
        directly to the four answer choices and use POE.



MAIN IDEA
Coming right after Retrieval questions, Main Idea questions also ask what the
author said. The difference is that Main Idea questions are looking for the
single sentence or idea that is the main focus of the text rather than a detail
about a character or thing. This should be the sentence or idea that all of the
other sentences and ideas are connected to. Many times, this will be the first
or last sentence of the paragraph, but College Board can place the main idea
anywhere. As you read, ask yourself, “Which sentence do all of the other
sentences build to or build off of?”

 1. Read the Question.

 2. Identify the Question Type. If you see the words main idea in the
    question stem, you have a Main Idea question that is asking for the
    central idea of the text. This can be explicitly stated in a single sentence,
    but it can also be a summary of the statements made in the text,
    especially if the author is describing an experiment or telling a
    chronological story.
3. Read the Text. As you read, focus on the person, place, or thing that is
   the central idea of the text. This should be an idea that each sentence
   describes or expands upon in some way.

4. Highlight What Can Help. This is another one of the more
   straightforward question types—you want to highlight the topic on which
   the text focuses the most. Make sure you’re not putting too much
   emphasis on a single detail. For instance, the author may describe a
   work from a famous environmentalist in one line, but if the rest of the
   lines don’t expand on that work but rather describe the
   environmentalist’s entire career, the work is not the main idea. Instead,
   the main idea would be the environmentalist’s career as a whole.

5. Use POE. The most common traps on a Main Idea question are Right
   Answer, Wrong Question (answers that focus on an accurate detail that
   is not the main focus of the other sentences as we described in Step 4),
   Recycled Language (repeated words that are used differently in the
   answer than in the text), and Could Be True answers (conclusions that
   seem logical but are not ideas supported directly by the text itself).




2.      Mark for Review
     Fire photography, the practice of taking photographs of firefighting
     operations, has numerous applications in both occupational safety and
     criminal investigation. Fire photographers can also work with fire
     departments directly. Despite their numerous job prospects, all fire
     photographers must first and foremost undergo rigorous safety training
     before setting foot into the field.

     Which choice best states the main idea of the text?

       A Advanced cameras can now take pictures from a much safer
         distance than fire photographers can.
        B Although there are numerous possible career paths for fire
          photographers, they must prioritize safety given the nature
          of their jobs.

        C While there are many possible career paths, most fire
          photographers prefer working directly with fire
          departments.

        D Fire photographers have been charged with documenting
          fires for a century.


Here’s How to Crack It
As you Read the Question, you can also Identify the Question Type as
Main Idea when you see the phrase “main idea.”

Next up, you Read the Text. As you read, ask yourself what person, place,
or thing is discussed in each sentence. Every single sentence here is about
fire photography in one way or another.

The last sentence, which you should Highlight, says that Despite their
numerous job prospects, all fire photographers must first and foremost
undergo rigorous safety training. Notice how this not only captures the
multiple career opportunities of fire photographers that the other two
sentences mention but also adds a detail about how all fire photographers…
must undergo rigorous safety training, regardless of career choice.

Once more, it’s time to Use POE. Compare the answers to the main idea you
found in the text.

Choice (A) should be eliminated because it’s a Could Be True trap answer:
as likely as it is that technology has reduced the need for fire photographers
to put themselves in harm’s way in some cases, the passage makes no
mention of any advanced cameras.
Choice (B) should be kept because it’s consistent with our highlighting. As
you’ve seen several times in these chapters, it paraphrases the text rather than
repeats it directly, but the meanings of both our highlighted sentence and (B)
are identical, or at least very close.

Choice (C) should be eliminated because it’s Half-Right: numerous career
paths is consistent with our highlighting, but the second half of the answer
contains Recycled and Extreme Language. Fire photographers, fire
departments, and directly are taken verbatim from the text, but it’s never
stated that most fire photographers prefer working with fire departments
directly.

Choice (D) should be eliminated because it is a Could Be True trap answer.
While it sounds logical that fire photographers have been doing their jobs for
as long as photographical equipment became portable enough to go out into
the field, the passage offers no statement on how long fire photographers
have been doing their jobs.

With three answers eliminated and only (C) remaining, you select (C) and
have successfully doused the fires of uncertainty regarding Main Idea
questions.




        The Main Idea Bottom Line: Search for and highlight the
        person, place, or thing that each sentence seems to be
        discussing or describing. While Main Idea questions are
        different from Purpose questions, both are concerned with
        finding the main focus or topic of the text. Avoid latching
        onto a single detail as a main idea.
CLAIMS
The next question type asks which answer would best illustrate, support, or
weaken a claim made by the author. Note that these questions are often
interspersed with the next question type, Charts, but luckily, the skills you
need for these two question types are similar. As with Retrieval and Main
Idea questions, your main job here will be to identify the claim made by the
author in the text without any regard to the structure or purpose of the text.
However, you’ll need to perform the exact task required by the question and
keep a razor-sharp eye as you use POE: it only takes one word or phrase to
make an answer do the opposite of what was intended!

 1. Read the Question. As you read the question, pay special attention to
    whether you’ll be illustrating, supporting, or weakening some idea
    from the text.

 2. Identify the Question Type. There are a few different ways College
    Board can ask a Claims question, but most commonly, you’ll see
    language in the question looking for something to illustrate, support, or
    weaken someone’s claim, hypothesis, argument, or prediction. These
    questions can also reference a quotation from the text that accomplishes
    a goal. When this happens, the text will be quite short, but the answers
    will be longer to compensate.

 3. Read the Text. As you read, focus on finding the claim or argument
    referenced by the question. In a longer text, this claim is likely to be part
    of the text’s main idea. In a shorter text asking about a quotation that
    illustrates the claim, the claim itself will precede the colon and the blank
    in the question stem.

 4. Highlight What Can Help. Your only job here is to highlight the claim,
    theory, argument, etc., referenced by the question stem, regardless of
    whether you need to illustrate it, strengthen it, or weaken it.
5. Use POE. The most common traps on a Claims question are Half-Right
   answers that only address part of the claim from the question and
   Opposite answers that would weaken when they are supposed to
   support the claim and vice versa. On longer Claim texts, you’ll also see
   answers include Extreme Language or make Could Be True
   assumptions that are unsupported by the text.




3.      Mark for Review
     “A Dry Spell” is a 1905 short story by Einar H. Kvaran. In the story,
     the narrator and his companions wait out an ongoing rain torrent in a
     store where they work as clerks. In his musings, the narrator expresses
     a desire for the presence of individuals that he formerly considered an
     annoyance: __________.

     Which quotation from the narrator’s musings best illustrates the claim?

       A “We sat there and smoked, staring vacantly at the half-empty
          shelves, and all but shivering in the damp room.”

       B “We made clever comments to the effect that the farmers
          were now getting plenty of moisture for the hay-fields, and
          that it would be a pity if rain should set in now, right at the
          beginning of the haying season.”

       C “We were tired of the store—indeed, I should like to know
          who would have enjoyed it.”

       D “We had often cursed their lengthy visits, but now that they
          had hired themselves out during the haymaking, we
          suddenly realized that they had often been entertaining.”
Here’s How to Crack It
As you Read the Question, notice that it is specifically looking for a
quotation, so scrutinizing the answers will be key. You can Identify the
Question Type as Claims by the phrase illustrates the claim.

Next up, Read the Text. As you read, remember that if the Claims question
has a blank at the end of it, the claim will typically be right before it, as is the
case here.

Sure enough, you want to Highlight the claim that the quotations from the
answers should illustrate. In this case, the narrator expresses a desire for
the presence of individuals that he formerly considered an annoyance. The
correct quotation should mention a group that the narrator formerly didn’t
want around but now does.

Lastly, it’s time to Use POE. Quotations in Claims questions will be among
the longer answer choices you’ll need to deal with, so double down on how
carefully you read.

Choice (A) should be eliminated because it doesn’t mention any group
besides the group of people inside the store, of which the narrator is one.
You are looking for a group the narrator now wishes was there but is not.

Choice (B) should be eliminated because it is Half-Right: while it
references a group that the narrator and his fellow clerks make fun of, the
answer never includes any mention of a desire for the presence of those
individuals now. Make sure to read all the way to the end of each quotation
and make sure it does every job stated in the claim!

Choice (C) should be eliminated because, like (A), there is no mention of any
group besides the narrator’s. Furthermore, the negative emotions presented
are towards the store, and not any other group of people.
Choice (D) should be kept because it’s consistent with the claim. We had
often cursed their lengthy visits could support annoyance at whoever they
are, and the narrator and his group stating that they suddenly realized that
they had often been entertaining supports that the presence of this group
may be welcome during the dreary storm the narrator and his group are
experiencing. Notice that the quotation doesn’t directly state that the narrator
necessarily wants this group here at this moment, but out of the four options,
it best illustrates the claim, rather than directly restating or proving it.

With three answers eliminated and only (D) remaining, you select (D) and
clear yet another Digital SAT storm cloud.




        The Claims Bottom Line: Focus on finding the claim and
        what the question asks you to do to it. Remember that the
        answers to a support or weaken question do NOT need to be
        supported by the text but rather, if true, would best support or
        weaken the claim in the text.



CHARTS
As mentioned before, Charts questions are interspersed with Claims
questions, though you won’t necessarily see both on the same module. Like
Claims questions, Charts questions will ask you to illustrate, support, or
weaken some claim. The biggest difference between the types is that here
you’ll be reading some information from a table or graph in addition to the
text. As with Dual Texts, it will be pretty clear when you are asked a Charts
question, so we’ll once again modify the Reading Basic Approach slightly to
make sure you catch everything needed to earn these points!
1. Read and understand the question. As with Claims questions, make
   sure you understand whether you’re being asked to illustrate, support,
   or weaken a statement from the text.

2. Read the title, key/legend, variables, and units from the table or
   graph. Orienting yourself to the graph before you are influenced by the
   text or answers will ensure you don’t jump to any conclusions and are
   able to efficiently process the chart again once you’re starting to use
   POE.

3. Read the text and look for the same information you saw in the table
   or graph. Much of the text will describe the setup or background to the
   data in the chart. What you’re actually looking for is when the author
   references the same variables or values as in the chart and makes some
   statement regarding them.

4. Highlight the claim made by the text regarding the same
   information. Once you’ve found the claim in question, highlight it.
   Often, it will appear towards the end of the text. Also, if a summary of
   the text is more helpful to you than a long-winded claim, don’t forget
   about your Annotation box and write a note to yourself if it is helpful.

5. Use POE. The most common trap answer on Charts questions is Right
   Answer, Wrong Question. Most of the answers to the question are
   accurate representations of the information from the chart but fail to
   address the claim that they are supposed to be illustrating, supporting, or
   weakening. These answers can focus on the wrong variable entirely or
   only focus on one variable when they need to focus on two. Answers can
   also be Half-Right for only addressing some of the claim, especially if
   the author names multiple conditions in their statement. Lastly, wrong
   answers can offer the Opposite relationship of the one proposed by the
   text, especially in the case of needing to support or weaken a claim.
4.      Mark for Review
       Nutritional Information for Skim Cow’s Milk and Unsweetened Oat
                         Milk Based on a 1 Cup Serving

         Milk type         Skim cow’s milk         Unsweetened oat milk
      Calories                    90                         90
      Fat (g)                      0                         1.5
      Sodium (mg)                 130                        120
      Sugars (g)                  12                          4

     In the field of nutrition, skim cow’s milk and unsweetened oat milk are
     two popular substitutions for whole milk, which can be too high in fat
     and cholesterol for some individuals. Each whole milk substitute goes
     through different processes that affect its final nutritional value. For
     instance, unsweetened oat milk is made by straining a blend of rolled
     oats (which have less sugar than cow’s milk) and water. A scientist
     theorized that because skim milk is whole milk that has been run
     through a centrifuge to separate out all of the fat droplets, it would
     likely have less fat content but higher sugar content than would
     unsweetened oat milk.

     Which choice most effectively uses data from the table that support the
     scientist’s hypothesis?

       A The skim cow’s milk has higher sugar content than fat
         content, but it also contains more sodium than does
         unsweetened oat milk.

       B Both the skim cow’s milk and the unsweetened oat milk’s
         sodium contents were over 100 milligrams per cup.
        C The skim cow’s milk and unsweetened oat milk both contain
          90 calories in an average 1 cup serving.

        D The unsweetened oat milk has lower sugar content but
          higher fat content than does the skim cow’s milk.


Here’s How to Crack It
As you Read and understand the question, note that the question asks you
to support the scientist’s hypothesis using data from the table.

Next up, Read the title, key/legend, variables, and units from the table or
graph. Not every chart has all of this (this two-way table has no key or
legend), but you want to understand as much as you can. This chart shows
Nutritional Information for Skim cow’s milk and Unsweetened oat milk, and
it shows Fat and Sugars in grams and Sodium in milligrams. You head into
the text fully expecting the scientist to make some claim about one or more of
these terms.

As you Read the text and look for the same information, notice that most
of the text simply offers some background to the data. While this must be read
in case the theory or claim has multiple aspects to it, keep pushing your eyes
forward and find the scientist’s hypothesis regarding the information from
the table.

Highlight that the scientist theorized that because skim milk is whole milk
that has been run through a centrifuge to separate out all of the fat
droplets, it would likely haveless fat content but higher sugar content
than unsweetened oat milk. The bolded segment at the end is the actual
piece of the theory that references the information from the table, so you
know this is the sentence to focus on.

You know what’s coming: it’s time to Use POE. Consider these answers one
at a time and compare them to the table AND what you highlighted.
Choice (A) should be eliminated because while it’s consistent with the table,
it does not address the claim. The claim focuses on the differing fat and sugar
contents of skim cow’s milk and unsweetened oat milk, while (A) only
focuses on the fat and sugar content in skim cow’s milk. Additionally, sodium
is not relevant to the claim.

Choice (B) should be eliminated because it is Right Answer, Wrong
Question. The answer is perfectly consistent with the chart but isn’t at all
referencing the highlighted claim, which asks you to focus on differing fat
and sugar content for the two milks, not sodium content.

Choice (C) should be eliminated because it is also Right Answer, Wrong
Question. It’s completely true based on the chart, but the claim offers no link
between calories and how calorie count would affect differences in fat
content and sugar content for the two milks.

Choice (D) should be kept because it’s consistent with the table AND the
claim. Unsweetened oat milk has lower sugar content (4 grams to
unsweetened cow’s milk’s 12 grams) but higher fat content (1.5 grams to
skim cow’s milk’s 0 grams). A correct answer won’t always repeat the claim
exactly but will offer a statement consistent with the claim.

                 When doing POE, remember that the answer needs
                 to reference the terms mentioned in the claim. Since
                 the claim deals exclusively with fat and sugar
                 content, (B) and (C) can be eliminated immediately
                 for referencing sodium and calories, respectively.


With three answers eliminated and only (D) remaining, you select (D) and
wonder why you must work your way through charts about milk on the
Digital SAT instead of just enjoying some cereal.
        The Charts Bottom Line: The correct answer to a Charts
        question needs to be consistent with both the chart AND the
        text. There can (and usually will) be several answers
        consistent with the chart, but only one will also be consistent
        with the stated claim in the text.



CONCLUSIONS
The last question type is very similar to the Claims question type that you
saw earlier: it will ask you to complete the text. However, rather than asking
you to potentially illustrate, support, or weaken some claim, Conclusions
questions are always asking you the same thing: which of the four answers is
a logical conclusion based on all of the other sentences given in the text? You
just need to read for the main claim made or investigated by the author and
choose a conclusion that is logically consistent with both the claim and
anything the author includes or discovers in relation to the claim. This sounds
thrilling, we know, so let’s see how the Basic Approach can help you.

 1. Read the Question.

 2. Identify the Question Type. If a question says Which choice most
    logically completes the text, you know that you have a Conclusions
    question. Almost every Conclusions question is phrased this way, though
    we have also seen “Which choice best describes X as presented by the
    text?” Either way, you’re being asked to include a logical summary or
    final statement consistent with everything described in the text.

 3. Read the Text. Here, the central claim or statement made by the author
    or group is likely to be followed up by some additional data or
    information. This information could support or contradict the original
    claim, but either way, you’ll need to read the entire text to make sure you
    catch those wrinkles in the story!
4. Highlight What Can Help. There are two helpful things to highlight on
   Conclusions questions: the claim itself and, as mentioned, the additional
   data or information that sheds more light, for better or worse, on the
   claim. Similarly, if the question instead asks you to describe someone or
   something, you’ll want to catch each major point made about that person
   or thing, as the correct answer should be a summary that captures all of
   the main points made by the text.

5. Use POE. The most common trap answer on Conclusions questions is
   Recycled Language, as College Board is counting on you to only look
   for matching words but not matching ideas. You’ll also see Right
   Answer, Wrong Question, as wrong answers can focus on a single
   detail from the text rather than serve as a conclusion to the entire text.
   Lastly, you’ll see Could Be True trap answers, as logical or real-world
   conclusions that are not supported by the text can really seem justified
   unless you double down on your highlighting and remember that you are
   here to eliminate answers, not justify them!




 5.      Mark for Review
      Western honeybees (Apis mellifera) are social insects that live inside
      rigid colonial nests made from wax, which can make it difficult to
      observe bee behavior within the colony. Bees typically form colonies
      with thousands to tens of thousands of bees, the weight of which would
      seem to place immense strain on the nest structure. Using an x-ray
      machine, researchers at CU Boulder have observed that swarms of A.
      mellifera inside the nest will form pyramids of bees, with larger
      numbers of bees at the base of the pyramid and fewer bees in each
      level as you move up the swarm. These researchers therefore imply that
      __________.

      Which choice most logically completes the text?
        A the pyramids formed by A. mellifera swarms may reduce
           strain on the nest structure.

        B any individual A. mellifera bee can be in danger of
           suffocation by the rest of the bee swarm.

        C improving the numbers of A. mellifera requires Western
           intervention.

        D colonial nests enable A. mellifera to produce high quantities
           of wax.


Here’s How to Crack It
As you Read the Question, you can also Identify the Question Type as
Conclusions because it asks you to logically complete the text.

As you Read the Text, be on the lookout for some claim or statement
regarding the main focus of the text. The main focus here is the Western
honeybee.

Highlight that the weight of the bee colony would seem to place immense
strain on the nest structure. This statement is very much like a claim—even
though it’s more fact than opinion or argument, it’s still a topic that the text
will explore further. Later, also Highlight that swarms of A. mellifera inside
the nest will form pyramids of bees, with larger numbers of bees at the
base of the pyramid and fewer bees in each level as one moves up the
pyramid. The correct answer will be consistent with both the statement made
in the text and the observations highlighted by the researchers towards the
end.

As always, the conclusion of these steps is to Use POE. Three of the four
answers won’t be consistent with all of that highlighting.
Choice (A) should be kept because it’s consistent with both items you
highlighted. Notice how, very importantly, the answer says may reduce the
strain rather than will reduce the strain. The text doesn’t support that there is
a definitive connection between the two, but the answer’s use of the word
may allows you to keep it and continue using POE.

Choice (B) should be eliminated because it is a Could Be True trap answer.
As logical as it is to assume that any individual bee could be in danger of
suffocation given the quantity of bees, the author never mentions suffocation
or anything like it in the text.

Choice (C) should be eliminated because it contains Recycled Language.
Western is used in the text as part of the name of the bee species, not as an
identifier for a region of the world, and the bee’s numbers are not stated to be
in need of intervention.

Choice (D) should be eliminated because it also contains Recycled
Language. The text states that the colonial nests are made from wax, not
that the colonial nests enable the bees to produce high quantities of wax.
Even if this were true in the real world, this answer ignores the central
question and observation regarding the strain placed on the nest and the
pyramid structure that the bees form.

With three answers eliminated and only (A) remaining, you select (A) and
tell the Digital SAT to mind its own beeswax.




        The Conclusions Bottom Line: The correct answer on a
        Conclusions question MUST take into account all of the
        information presented in the text. These questions, therefore,
        can require more highlighting than other question types.
        Above all else, eliminate answers that aren’t consistent with
that highlighting and don’t look to justify answers—look to
eliminate them!
Summary
 You should Annotate whenever a summary or paraphrase of the text
 would be helpful when using POE.

 Retrieval questions require you to look for what the author said about a
 topic or why something occurred in the story.

 Main Idea questions require you to look for the central person and/or
 idea that the author focuses on in each sentence.

 Claims questions are interspersed with Charts questions and ask you to
 illustrate, support, or weaken some claim in the text.

 Charts questions are interspersed with Claims questions and ask you to
 select data from a table or graph that illustrates, supports, or weakens a
 claim.

 Conclusions questions always come last and ask for a concluding
 sentence to a series of ideas or a summary of the text’s main points.

 Don’t forget POOD and LOTD. If a chart looks intimidating or a text is
 so dense that it’s hard to find a claim to strengthen or weaken, enter your
 Letter of the Day and move on!
Chapter 9
Advanced Reading Skills
In this chapter, we’ll run through four different areas of the exam that you can
focus on to further improve your score. Keep in mind that if you’re following
the Basic Approach and adapting it to the eight question types we discussed
in the last two chapters, that should be enough to earn you a good chunk of the
points that you may have been missing. However, sometimes difficult
vocabulary, appealing trap answers, dense poetry, and complicated sentence
structure can really affect your ability to find correct answers within the text
and use POE. This chapter seeks to offer a solution to each of those issues to
keep your score and spirits improving.
VOCABULARY: PLAYING THE GREATEST
HITS
As we discussed back in Chapter 7, Vocabulary is one of the most frequent of
the eight question types, which means that you’ll likely be able to notice the
difficulty increase (unlike with other question types that may have only 1 or 2
questions in an RW module). Similarly, should you do well enough on RW
Module 1 to get the harder RW Module 2, you’ll notice more difficult
vocabulary words. In Chapter 7, we mentioned that creating a Greatest Hits
list is a great way to start familiarizing yourself with words that you’ve seen
and want to remember for next time. Here, we’ll do our part as well: below
is a list of words we’ve seen show up frequently on official SAT exams or
released College Board products.


        Spending 5–10 minutes a day EVERY DAY on our Greatest
        Hits, your own Greatest Hits, or a combination of both is the
        best way to improve your vocabulary and potentially boost
        your RW score!



Word: adhere
Part of Speech: verb
Definition: to believe in and follow the practices of
Example: It can be difficult to adhere to a workout regimen without
coaching and discipline.

Word: advocate
Part of Speech: verb
Definition: to publicly recommend or support
Example: Upon his appointment, the new vice president of the company
promised to advocate for increased vacation time for all employees.
Word: allude
Part of Speech: verb
Definition: to suggest or call attention to indirectly; to hint at
Example: I didn’t mean to allude to your past breakup when discussing
celebrity romances that ended badly.

Word: ambivalence
Part of Speech: noun
Definition: the state of having mixed feelings or contradictory ideas about
something or someone
Example: Understandably, Jillian struggled with ambivalence regarding the
group project: she loved working with her friends but felt that the work was
never divided evenly.

Word: analogous
Part of Speech: adjective
Definition: comparable in certain respects, typically in a way which makes
clearer the nature of the things compared
Example: The rocking of a ship against the waves has been described by
some as analogous to the ups and downs of a rollercoaster ride.

Word: anecdote
Part of Speech: noun
Definition: a short amusing or interesting story about a real incident or
person
Example: Our professor opened the semester with a number of humorous
anecdotes about excuses he has heard from students who missed class.

Word: apprehensive
Part of Speech: adjective
Definition: anxious or fearful that something bad or unpleasant will happen
Example: Lauren was apprehensive about her upcoming violin recital: she
had practiced enough but had never performed in front of more than four or
five people.

Word: arbitrary
Part of Speech: adjective
Definition: based on random choice or personal whim, rather than any
reason or system
Example: The town’s enforcement of parking rules felt arbitrary, as some
days the rules would be strictly enforced and other days it seemed
impossible to get a ticket no matter how severe the infraction.

Word: assert
Part of Speech: verb
Definition: to state a fact or belief confidently and forcefully
Example: After listening to the rest of the board members shout over each
other, Dominic felt the need to assert that this time could have been better
spent offering practical solutions to the issue.

Word: bias
Part of Speech: noun
Definition: prejudice in favor of or against one thing, person, or group
compared with another, usually in a way considered to be unfair
Example: Though she promised to be free of bias, it became evident very
quickly that my mom preferred a dog over a cat as a potential pet.

Word: brevity
Part of Speech: noun
Definition: concise and exact use of words in writing or speech
Example: Sabrina’s notes were known for their brevity, as entire concepts
were often summed up into a small series of words and phrases.

Word: buttress
Part of Speech: verb
Definition: to increase the strength of or justification for; to reinforce
Example: The commissioner has promised to train 30 new recruits by the
end of the year in order to buttress the police force as the city’s borders
expand.

Word: concede
Part of Speech: verb
Definition: to admit that something is true or valid after first denying or
resisting it
Example: After an intense debate, I was forced to concede that my
opponent had a strong argument regarding the need for district-wide budget
reallocation.

Word: consensus
Part of Speech: noun
Definition: a general agreement
Example: With everyone wanting a different cuisine, the group of friends
found it nearly impossible to come to a consensus.

Word: corroborate
Part of Speech: verb
Definition: to confirm or give support to (a statement, theory, or finding)
Example: The thief claimed to have an alibi at the time of the crime but
could not produce any friend or family to corroborate his story.

Word: decisive
Part of Speech: adjective
Definition: settling an issue; producing a definite result
Example: Megan scored a decisive victory for her field hockey team,
netting four goals in just the first half of the game.

Word: deference
Part of Speech: noun
Definition: humble submission and respect
Example: The student spoke with deference to his master when discussing
the proper application of a mixed martial arts technique.

Word: degrade
Part of Speech: verb
Definition: to treat or regard (someone) with contempt or disrespect
Example: The harsh note taped to the bulletin board in the employee
breakroom was clearly meant to degrade those who were not clocking back
in from breaks on time.

Word: denounce
Part of Speech: verb
Definition: to publicly declare to be wrong or evil
Example: The principal was expected to denounce graphic T-shirts as
unacceptable school attire, but she surprised everyone when she stated that
she considered them to be an important part of self-expression.

Word: dispute
Part of Speech: noun
Definition: a disagreement, argument, or debate
Example: A handshake, or verbal, agreement between employer and
employee can lead to a dispute when one party does not follow through and
there is no written documentation to resolve the matter.

Word: divergent
Part of Speech: adjective
Definition: tending to be different or develop in different directions
Example: Due to the unclear instructions, students took divergent paths in
their papers, with some arguing multiple perspectives and some switching
topics altogether.

Word: dormant
Part of Speech: adjective
Definition: having normal physical functions suspended or slowed down for
a period of time; in or as if in a deep sleep
Example: Though the volcano once erupted randomly and violently for
decades, it now lies dormant and is a popular tourist attraction.

Word: eloquent
Part of Speech: adjective
Definition: fluent or persuasive in speaking or writing
Example: Shakespeare’s sonnets are considered some of the most eloquent
poems in British literature.

Word: evoke
Part of Speech: verb
Definition: to bring or recall to the conscious mind
Example: A country’s national anthem is meant to evoke feelings of pride in
its citizens.

Word: exert
Part of Speech: verb
Definition: to make a physical or mental effort
Example: Math Olympiad competitors exert a tremendous amount of mental
energy solving calculations while under a time limit.

Word: explicit
Part of Speech: adjective
Definition: stated clearly and in detail, leaving no room for confusion or
doubt
Example: The teacher’s classroom rules were explicit; they were written
on a poster right above her desk.

Word: imminent
Part of Speech: adjective
Definition: about to happen
Example: The decreasing temperatures and darkening skies mean that a
rainstorm is imminent.

Word: impede
Part of Speech: verb
Definition: to delay or prevent (someone or something) by obstructing; to
hinder
Example: The city council attempted to impede the fast-food restaurant’s
efforts to install a drive-thru window.

Word: implicit
Part of Speech: adjective
Definition: implied but not plainly expressed
Example: The group had seen Sara’s terrified reactions to horror movies
and had an implicit understanding not to choose that genre for movie night.

Word: impose
Part of Speech: verb
Definition: to take advantage of someone by demanding attention or
commitment
Example: The mayor has decided to impose a curfew upon residents of his
town.

Word: indifference
Part of Speech: noun
Definition: lack of interest, concern, or sympathy
Example: Sam responded to the discussion of a road trip with indifference,
as he would have been equally happy staying home.

Word: inevitable
Part of Speech: adjective
Definition: certain to happen; unavoidable
Example: Once the school mandated a dress code, it was inevitable that the
students would test the limits of what they could get away with.

Word: invoke
Part of Speech: verb
Definition: to cite or appeal to (someone or something) as an authority for
an action or in support of an argument
Example: The police captain’s son would often invoke his father’s name to
get himself out of trouble.

Word: ironic
Part of Speech: adjective
Definition: happening in the opposite way from what is expected and
typically causing amusement because of this
Example: It is ironic that the tech support company’s website was listed as
down for maintenance.

Word: novel
Part of Speech: adjective
Definition: new or unusual in an interesting way
Example: Novel ideas, such as Galileo’s model for the Earth revolving
around the Sun, usually take time to be accepted by those comfortable with
traditional views.

Word: obscure
Part of Speech: adjective
Definition: not discovered or known about; uncertain
Example: John’s pop culture references were so remarkably obscure that
his friends could go for hours without knowing a single actor or movie he
mentioned.

Word: obsolete
Part of Speech: adjective
Definition: no longer produced or used; out of date
Example: Zara was dismayed to learn her phone was considered obsolete
just one year after she purchased it.

Word: oppressive
Part of Speech: adjective
Definition: unjustly inflicting hardship and constraint; weighing heavily on
the mind or spirits
Example: The heat of the jungle was so oppressive that the expedition team
took breaks twice as often as planned.

Word: pervasive
Part of Speech: adjective
Definition: spreading widely throughout an area or a group of people,
especially in an unpleasant way
Example: The aging boat had holes in its hull and a pervasive smell of
rotting wood.

Word: prevalence
Part of Speech: noun
Definition: the fact or condition of being prevalent; commonness
Example: The prevalence of transfer students on college football teams has
made roster adjustments a year-round endeavor.

Word: prominent
Part of Speech: adjective
Definition: important; famous
Example: One of the most prominent American presidents, George
Washington, is often noted as having set numerous presidential precedents.

Word: provoke
Part of Speech: verb
Definition: to stimulate or give rise to a reaction or emotion, typically a
strong or unwelcome one in someone
Example: I knew I couldn’t let Anthony provoke me into an argument again,
as he often did.

Word: reciprocate
Part of Speech: verb
Definition: to respond to (a gesture or action) by making a corresponding
one
Example: Jennifer was so touched by the Christmas gift she received from
Isabelle that she made plans to reciprocate as soon as she could get to the
mall.

Word: reconcile
Part of Speech: verb
Definition: to restore friendly relations between
Example: William texted Caleb an apology as a means to reconcile
following their recent disagreement.

Word: refute
Part of Speech: verb
Definition: to prove (a statement or theory) to be wrong or false; disprove
Example: Scientists often publish papers meant to refute theories that they
have disproven through experimentation.

Word: renounce
Part of Speech: verb
Definition: to formally declare one’s abandonment of (a claim, right, or
possession)
Example: In a shocking move, the king has decided to renounce his right to
the throne, sending the country into a panic.

Word: repression
Part of Speech: noun
Definition: the restraint, prevention, or inhibition of a feeling, quality, etc.
Example: When citizens of a nation endure long periods of political
repression, it can lead to verbal or physical altercations throughout that
country.

Word: retain
Part of Speech: verb
Definition: to continue to have (something); keep possession of
Example: In an effort to retain her position as class president, Cynthia put
up flyers asking for students’ votes in the upcoming election.

Word: skeptical
Part of Speech: adjective
Definition: not easily convinced; having doubts or reservations
Example: Bryce was skeptical of his order’s estimated arrival date: past
orders from the same company had taken a week longer than advertised.

Word: speculate
Part of Speech: verb
Definition: to form a theory or conjecture about a subject without firm
evidence
Example: The lawyer refused to speculate on the outcome of the trial, but
she was hopeful that her client would be found innocent.

Word: substantiate
Part of Speech: verb
Definition: to provide evidence to support or prove the truth of
Example: The researcher ran a series of experiments hoping to substantiate
her theory of engine mechanics before presenting it to her supervisor for
review.

Word: subtle
Part of Speech: adjective
Definition: so delicate or precise as to be difficult to analyze or describe
Example: A slight cough from a friend can be a subtle indication that the
friend wishes to depart from a social situation in which they feel
uncomfortable.

Word: supplement
Part of Speech: noun
Definition: something that completes or enhances something else when
added to it
Example: Milk is often considered the perfect supplement to cereal, though
other liquids have become popular choices in recent years.

Word: tenuous
Part of Speech: adjective
Definition: very weak or slight
Example: With just seconds to go in the game, the team clung to a tenuous
one-point lead.

Word: undermine
Part of Speech: verb
Definition: to lessen the effectiveness, power, or ability of
Example: Michael practically ran on his way to school, worried that a mark
of tardy would undermine his perfect attendance record.

Word: underscore
Part of Speech: verb
Definition: to emphasize or draw attention to
Example: Margaux came to her presentation with a series of handouts for
her colleagues, hoping this would underscore the amount of work she had put
into her project.

Word: unobtrusive
Part of Speech: adjective
Definition: not conspicuous or attracting attention
Example: Garbage cans at Disney World are painted to be as unobtrusive
as possible, often blending into their surroundings.

Word: validate
Part of Speech: verb
Definition: to check or prove the validity or accuracy of (something)
Example: The clerk refused to validate my license, noting that it expired
one month ago.

Word: verisimilitude
Part of Speech: noun
Definition: the appearance of being true or real
Example: Despite being a work of fiction, the movie possessed such
authentic characters and believable dialogue that critics praised it for its
verisimilitude.

Word: viable
Part of Speech: adjective
Definition: capable of working successfully; feasible
Example: The hiring supervisor was pleased to find that so many viable
candidates had applied for the position.


DOWN TO TWO (OR MORE): MASTERING
POE
Sometimes, even when you find an amazing piece of evidence to highlight,
you’ll still have two (or more) appealing answers that have survived the
initial POE process. Other times, the text is difficult enough that you aren’t
able to pin down that one piece of evidence or aren’t able to make an
annotation. In these cases, all hope is not lost. Remember that every question
has three wrong answers and that most, though not all, of these answers are
traps. Understanding trap answers and actively looking for traps can earn you
points at these critical moments!

As a reminder, here’s the POE criteria you saw in Chapter 6:

    Recycled Language: These answer choices repeat exact words and
    phrases from the text but put the words together to say something that the
    text didn’t actually say. They often establish relationships between the
    words and phrases that do not exist in the text.

    Could Be True: These answers might initially look good because they
    make sense or seem logical based on outside reasoning, but they lack
    support within the text itself.

    Extreme Language: These answers look just about perfect except for a
    word or phrase that goes too far beyond what the text can support.

    Right Answer, Wrong Question: These answer choices are true based
    on the text, but they don’t answer the question asked. They can also state
    what the author said when the question was asking why the author said it.

    Opposite: These answer choices have a single word or phrase that make
    the answer convey a tone, viewpoint, or meaning not intended by the
    author. This can include a word such as “not” in the answer or a negative
    vocabulary word when the tone of the text was positive.

    Half-Right: These answers address part but not all of the question task.
    They can also have one half of the answer address the question perfectly
    and the other half contain at least one of the traps mentioned previously.

In this next exercise, you’ll see that we’ve eliminated at least one answer
already based on highlighting, annotating, or an answer being so completely
inconsistent with the topic of the text that it’s no longer even worth displaying
here.
Try to determine the remaining trap answer, or answers, on your own, then
read through the explanation below in order to understand the most efficient
way to use POE when two or more answers remain.


         The most critical question to ask if two or more answers
         remain once you’ve compared every answer to what you
         found in the text is “Which answer is the trap?” This turns
         your focus away from justification and back to active Process
         of Elimination!



  1.      Mark for Review
       The following text is from Jane Austen’s 1818 novel Northanger
       Abbey. Catherine Morland, the main character, has recently been
       invited to spend the next six weeks on vacation in Bath, England.

       In addition to what has been already said of Catherine Morland’s
       personal and mental endowments, when about to be launched
       into all the difficulties and dangers of a six weeks’ residence in
       Bath, it may be stated, for the reader’s more certain information,
       lest the following pages should otherwise fail of giving any idea
       of what her character is meant to be, that her heart was
       affectionate; her disposition cheerful and open, without conceit
       or affectation of any kind—her manners just removed from the
       awkwardness and shyness of a girl; her person pleasing, and,
       when in good looks, pretty—and her mind about as ignorant and
       uninformed as the female mind at seventeen usually is.

       Which choice best states the main purpose of the text?

         A To establish that Catherine is as naïve as expected of one
           her age
         B To describe Catherine’s personality and level of maturity
            prior to her trip

         C To convey Catherine’s disapproval towards the family that
            will host her in Bath

         D To explain the difficulties and dangers that Catherine will
           face in Bath

Which answer is the trap? The trap answer to this Purpose question is (A).

Why? This trap answer is Right Answer, Wrong Question. It’s completely
supported by the final sentence of the text, which states and her mind about
as ignorant and uninformed as the female mind at seventeen usually is.
The problem is that the question asks for the main purpose of the text, and the
rest of the text doesn’t discuss Catherine’s naiveté at all!

So, which answer must be correct? By Process of Elimination, the correct
answer is (B).

Why? Careful highlighting would show that the text describes Catherine
Morland’s mental and personal endowments, that her heart was
affectionate, her disposition cheerful and open, without conceit or
affectation, and her person pleasing, which are all just as important to the
description as the naiveté from the last lines you saw earlier. A good
annotation for the answer here would have been “describe how Catherine
acts and thinks,” which is fairly consistent with (B).

  2.      Mark for Review
       Artificial sweeteners offer an appealing alternative to sugar, but they
       may carry unintended consequences for the body because of their effect
       on the gut microbiome. It has been demonstrated that the bacteria that
       make up the gut microbiome affect glucose tolerance and appetite.
     Researchers at the Weizmann Institute of Science claim that the
     consumption of artificial sweeteners such as sucralose can lower
     glucose tolerance and increase appetite in humans. The researchers
     conducted a study comparing the glucose tolerance and appetite levels
     of people who had been fed sucralose against a control group who was
     not fed sucralose.

     Which finding from the researchers’ study, if true, would most directly
     support their hypothesis?

        A Both the individuals who consumed sucralose and the
          control group had much higher glucose tolerance levels at
          the conclusion of the study.

        B At the conclusion of the study, individuals who consumed
          sucralose had lower glucose tolerance levels but also
          decreased appetite levels compared to the control group.

        C Individuals who consumed sucralose had lower glucose
           tolerance levels and increased appetite levels at the
           conclusion of the study compared to the control group.

        D When individuals who consumed sucralose were
          interviewed, they were found to also have consumed large
          quantities of water, which is known to decrease appetite.

Which answer is the trap? The trap answer to this Claims question is (B).

Why? This trap answer is Half-Right. It looks incredibly solid, except for
the very end when it mentions that the sucralose group had decreased
appetite levels compared to the control group, while the text states that
sucralose should increase appetite. Most of the time, Half-Right answers
will contain one of the other traps; in this case, the very end of the answer
contains information that is the Opposite of what’s presented in the text.
So, which answer must be correct? By Process of Elimination, the correct
answer is (C).

Why? This answer is consistent with the researchers’ claim from the text,
which should be highlighted when taking the test: sucralose can lower
glucose tolerance and increase appetite in humans. Therefore, the group
taking sucralose should present lower glucose tolerance levels and
increased appetite levels compared to the control group, as (C) states.

Even if you eliminate just a single answer, or even no answers at all, through
your highlighting and annotating, you can still efficiently use POE by
comparing the answers to what you can see in the text!

  3.      Mark for Review
       Barefoot running, the act of running without footwear, has increased in
       popularity since the year 2000, with exercise enthusiasts looking to
       reduce the repetitive stress injuries caused by padded running
       footwear. However, the practice dates back thousands of years, with
       some long-established Latin American and African groups utilizing
       barefoot running even up to the present day despite the availability of
       modern footwear in those regions. This suggests that before the year
       2000, __________.

       Which choice most logically completes the text?

         A certain practitioners of barefoot running in different regions
            of the world may have discovered its benefits before the
            year 2000.

         B barefoot running has made exercise more accessible to
            those who cannot afford expensive footwear.

         C barefoot running will soon surpass other methods of
            exercise as awareness of its benefits becomes more
            prevalent.

         D footwear manufacturers could increase profits if they
            created region-specific running shoe designs.


                 Answers that say something will happen are almost
                 certainly wrong because they are Extreme
                 Language. People can predict what is likely to
                 happen, or what may happen, but no one can say
                 what will happen.


Which answer is a trap? The first trap answer to this Conclusions question
is (B).

Why? This trap answer is a Could Be True trap. Anytime you look at an
answer and say, “Well, this is true” or “This makes sense,” you want to
remind yourself that what makes an answer correct on the Digital SAT is that
it is supported by the text and that it answers the question. As logical as it is
to assume that increased awareness of the benefits of barefoot running may
decrease the barrier to exercise created by expensive footwear, the author
never mentions anything regarding expensive footwear in the text. If an
answer is something you could only support if you had a chance to argue
about it with someone, it’s probably a wrong answer.

Which remaining answer is also a trap? The second trap answer is (C).

Why? This answer is a type of Extreme Language trap. While it may not
contain words like only or most which are more concretely extreme words, it
still takes an opinion or claim made in the text too far. The opening sentence
states that barefoot running…has increased in popularity, but that doesn’t
mean that barefoot running will surpass other methods of exercise as (C)
states. The text would need to state this bold prediction and not just offer a
piece of evidence that may support such a prediction as if it were part of a
much longer, much more detailed argument.
So, which answer must be correct? By Process of Elimination, the correct
answer is (A).

Why? This answer is consistent with the text. In the opening line, the text
states that barefoot running…has increased in popularity since the year
2000. However, the practice dates back thousands of years for certain
Latin American and African groups, who are described as still using the
practice up to the present day despite the availability of modern footwear in
those regions. This means that those Latin American and African groups
have chosen to continue barefoot running even with the option to acquire
modern footwear. While you can’t know for sure that this means they
discovered the benefits of barefoot running before the year 2000, the phrase
may have is just loose enough to be supported by the text. Remember, one
more time, that the right answer for Conclusions questions will not always be
directly stated or proven by the text—it will be the best supported of the four
answers.


POETRY: KEEPING YOUR COOL
Occasionally (likely no more than two times per module), your source text on
a literature-based question will be a poem or poetry excerpt. This is no
reason to panic: College Board isn’t expecting you to be a Poet Laureate or
the next Shakespeare. Understand that poems still make claims and tell
stories just as prose does, only the language follows a meter and/or rhyme
scheme. Poetry often shows up on Claims questions, but we have seen it on
Purpose, Retrieval, and Main Idea questions as well.

Before we dive into some poetry-based Digital SAT questions, let’s see
some common phrases as they appear in poetry and what those mean in
modern English.

                                      Modern
                Poetic Contraction or
                                      English
                Abbreviation
                                      Word(s)
                ’tis                       it is
                ’twas                      it was
                o’er                       over
                ne’er                      never
                ere                        before
                e’en                       even
                o’                         of
                an’                        and

This may clear up some confusion, but the other key to understanding poetry
is that poets often use more comparative literary devices than other writers
do, most often comparing the person or thing that is the focus to some element
from the natural or supernatural world. While you won’t be asked to identify
literary devices as part of a question, know that poems on the Digital SAT
often use analogies, metaphors, and similes to enhance the impact of their
language. The distinctions among these don’t matter that much, as long as you
understand that all of them are used to describe ideas by comparing them to
other ideas.

    Example of an analogy: Pain is our fire alarm. The sharpness of the
    alarm alerts us to an issue.

    Example of a metaphor: Our car sailed gracefully through the sea of
    traffic as we navigated the rough waters of the interstate with a
    captain’s precision.

    Example of a simile: He’s got a heart as warm as solid ice and a smile
    as pleasing as spoiled milk.
4.      Mark for Review
     The following text is from Archibald Lampman’s 1899 poem “The
     Mystery of a Year.” In this poem, the speaker is describing a woman
     whom he has known for some time.

      A little while, a year agone, I knew her for a romping child,
      A dimple and a glance that shone With idle mischief when she
             smiled.

      To-day she passed me in the press, And turning with a quick
           surprise
      I wondered at her stateliness, I wondered at her altered eyes.

     Which choice best states the main idea of the text?

       A The speaker is reminiscing about a past romantic
         relationship with a woman.

       B The speaker is astonished at the changes within a certain
         individual.

       C The speaker is an expert in observing subtle changes in
         others.

       D The speaker uses intricate and complex thought processes to
         impress those around him.




                              Watch Us Crack It
Here’s How to Crack It
As you Read the Question, you can also Identify the Question Type as
Main Idea when you see main idea in the question stem—we know, it’s quite
revolutionary!

As you Read the Text, focus on the person, place, or thing the lines chiefly
focus on.

The main focus of the text is the woman the narrator is describing. Highlight
A little while, a year agone, I knew her for a romping child. This indicates
what the narrator thought of the woman in the past (he thought of her as a
child). Also Highlight To-Day she passed me in the press, And turning with
a quick surprise, I wondered at her stateliness. This indicates what the
narrator thinks of her now (he is surprised by her growth and now thinks of
her as a woman). You may wish to make an annotation to the effect of “girl
narrator knew has changed” in your annotation box.

It’s time to use POE. Only one of these answers will be consistent with the
main idea we found, poetry or not.

Choice (A) should be eliminated because there is no mention of a romantic
relationship in the text. It would be a Could Be True trap to assume there
needs to be any romance between the narrator and the woman.

Choice (B) should be kept because while astonished is a fairly strong word,
the mention of surprise and wondered within the text are enough to keep this
answer in play for now, and the narrator certainly notices changes within a
certain individual, the woman.

Choice (C) should be eliminated because it is the Opposite of what the
passage states. These are not subtle changes in the girl; they are quite stark,
or obvious, changes. Additionally, the text doesn’t support that the narrator is
an expert in noticing changes.
Choice (D) should be eliminated because it is a Could Be True trap and a
fairly Extreme logical leap as well. One might assume intricate and
complex thought processes to be part of poetry in general, but the narrator’s
thoughts are not described in the text. Also, the text doesn’t state that the
narrator uses these thoughts to impress anyone around him.

With three answers eliminated and only (B) remaining, you select (B) and
celebrate the not-so-subtle positive changes in your own Digital SAT
performance.




  5.      Mark for Review
       “A Ballad of Evesham” is a 1933 poem by Francis T. Palgrave. The
       poem demonstrates a character’s ignorance of a deception created by
       his enemy: __________.

       Which quotation from the poem most effectively illustrates the claim?

         A “Earl Simon on the Abbey tower / In summer sunshine
            stood, / While helm and lance o’er Greenhill heights /
            Come glinting through the wood.”

         B “‘My son!’ he cried, ‘I know his flag / Amongst a thousand
            glancing’:— / Fond father! no!—’tis Edward stern / In
            royal strength advancing.”

         C “The Prince fell on him like a hawk / At Al’ster yester-eve,
            / And flaunts his captured banner now / And flaunts but to
            deceive:—”
        D “—Look round! for Mortimer is by, / And guards the
           rearward river:— / The hour that parted sire and son / Has
           parted them for ever!”


Here’s How to Crack It
As you Read the Question, you can also Identify the Question Type as
Claims when you see illustrates the claim in the question stem.

As you Read the Text, which is quite short, you can Highlight the claim you
are meant to illustrate: a character’s ignorance of a deception created by
his enemy.

Once again, it’s time to Use POE. Keep in mind that the right answer must
address the entire claim, not just part of it.

Choice (A) should be eliminated because the answer only describes Earl
Simon and what he observes approaching his tower. The answer doesn’t
indicate anyone who has fallen for any type of deception.

Choice (B) should be kept because the first half of the answer has a character
(he) believe the approaching figure is his son because he sees his son’s flag.
However, another character in the second half of the answer, presumably
another son of the Earl’s since he cries out “Fond father,” warns the first
person that the approaching individual is Edward, who is advancing his
forces towards the tower.

Choice (C) should be eliminated because it is Half-Right: it more
thoroughly explains the deception carried out by Edward, which makes the
answer quite appealing. However, recall that the right answer here must also
mention a character’s ignorance, and in these lines, no one has fallen for the
ruse as the character did in (B).

Choice (D) should be eliminated because it doesn’t mention the deception by
Edward nor the Earl’s ignorance of that deception.
With three answers eliminated and only (B) remaining, you select (B) and
won’t be deceived by the Digital SAT’s own clever tricks.




SENTENCE FUNCTION: UNDERSTANDING
WHY SENTENCES ARE INCLUDED
Since you only have approximately 1 minute and 11 seconds per question,
spending large amounts of time understanding the structure of each text isn’t
practical. However, learning to understand the roles that sentences can
perform will help you on Purpose, Dual Texts, Main Idea, Claims, and
Conclusions question, as each of these question types tends to require you to
find a main idea and/or the most likely reason the author would have
included something. If you’re finding it difficult to navigate a text but can
determine which role each sentence is performing, this can help you zero in
on the one or two sentences you need in order to capture that main idea or
understand the link between ideas. Keep in mind that these sentence
functions are much more common in non-literature texts (such as
science) than in literature texts.

The most common functions a sentence can perform on the Digital SAT are as
follows:

Background: This sentence provides context or information regarding a
topic that the author feels is necessary for the reader to understand before any
arguments are made. Background sentences are usually factual in nature and
often occur at the start of a story.

Claim: This sentence contains the author’s, an individual’s, or a group’s
main argument, theory, or opinion. A critical feature of a claim is that it is
something that can be disagreed with and needs to be supported by evidence.
Objection: This sentence is a special type of claim in which someone in the
text argues against a claim, theory, or opinion made by someone else in the
text. It often includes words such as but or however.

Evidence: This sentence usually contains lots of details and is used to
support Claims or Objections. While most evidence occurs after a claim or
objection, it can also come before if the author has chosen to build up to their
claim.

Consider the following text:

      With the initial growth of suburban communities in the mid-
      twentieth century, residential pools went from the domain of only
      the wealthiest individuals to attainable amenities for those with
      more modest incomes. However, this boon came with
      predictably negative consequences for local wildlife near these
      communities. Improper drainage of water in pools and spas used
      for personal recreation has led to widespread contamination that
      can cause immense environmental damage and even kill plant
      and animal life. A group of researchers has posited that proper
      drainage of pool water can help to reverse the damage done to
      suburban environments. In a survey conducted on soil
      surrounding residential pools in various American suburbs, the
      researchers found the toxicity of soil surrounding pools in which
      the owner had followed the manufacturer’s drainage instructions
      to be 46% lower than the toxicity levels of soil surrounding
      pools for which the instructions had been followed improperly.

This example is among the longest texts you’d ever see on the Digital SAT
but actually only comprises five sentences, each with one of the four main
sentence functions. For each sentence, try to determine which function the
sentence is performing before looking at our explanation on the next page.
      With the initial growth of suburban communities in the mid-
      twentieth century, residential pools went from the domain of only
      the wealthiest individuals to attainable amenities for those with
      more modest incomes.

How would you categorize Sentence 1: background, claim, objection, or
evidence?

Sentence 1 gives background information. It states the historical context that
helps the reader understand how residential pools became more prevalent,
which contributes to the problem discussed in the text. If you’re looking for a
claim or a main idea, you know to keep pushing your eyes forward to the next
sentence.

      However, this boon came with predictably negative
      consequences for local wildlife near these communities.

How would you categorize Sentence 2: background, claim, objection, or
evidence?

Sentence 2 provides an objection. Note the presence of the word However at
the start of the sentence. It may seem odd that an author can object to
background information, but it’s a very common way for authors to generate
interest in their topic and call attention to an issue that has arisen from a prior
decision. You now know that the author believes the prevalence of
residential pools has been negative, so answers that express a positive
attitude towards residential pools can be eliminated.

      Improper drainage of water in pools and spas used for personal
      recreation has led to widespread contamination that can cause
      immense environmental damage and even kill plant and animal
      life.
How would you categorize Sentence 3: background, claim, objection, or
evidence?

Sentence 3 is evidence. Authors shouldn’t make claims or objections without
backing them up. Here, the author needed to explain exactly how an increase
in residential pools has harmed the environment. Make sure to read evidence
carefully but not to over-analyze it. Unless you’re dealing with a Retrieval
question, you want to know why the evidence is there rather than deeply
comprehend every last word in the evidence.

      A group of researchers has posited that proper drainage of pool
      water can help to reverse the damage done to suburban
      environments.

How would you categorize Sentence 4: background, claim, objection, or
evidence?

Sentence 4 is a claim. Words such as believe, posit, or hypothesize are dead
giveaways that a claim or opinion is being stated in the text. This is often the
key thing you are looking for on Dual Texts, Main Idea, Claims, and Charts
questions, and it’s helpful as part of the answer to Purpose questions as well.
This is why reading the question carefully matters so much: does the question
ask you to work with the researchers’ claim from this sentence, or the
author’s view from sentence 2? You could easily see a Right Answer, Wrong
Question trap that focuses on the wrong claim entirely.

      In a survey conducted on soil surrounding residential pools in
      various American suburbs, the researchers found the toxicity of
      soil surrounding pools in which the owner had followed the
      manufacturer’s drainage instructions to be 46% lower than the
      toxicity levels of soil surrounding pools for which the
      instructions had been followed improperly.
How would you categorize Sentence 5: background, claim, objection, or
evidence?

Sentence 5 is evidence. As with the objection in sentence 2, the text should
offer some data that either supports or refutes the claim made previously. In
this case, the data here supports that proper drainage would help reduce
environmental damage, as the researchers claimed. You already know that
this evidence supports the researchers’ claim, so answers that contradict the
researchers’ claim can be eliminated right away.
Summary
 Studying the Vocabulary Greatest Hits 5–10 minutes a day is a
 straightforward but powerful way to help your RW score. You should
 study a blend of your own Greatest Hits discussed in Chapter 7 and the
 one included in this chapter.

 When down to two (or more) answers after comparing the answers to
 your highlighting and annotation, the critical question to ask is “Which of
 the remaining answers is a trap?” Aim to find a reason each answer is
 wrong, not justify an answer that you want to pick but that isn’t fully
 supported.

 As a reminder, the six trap answers are:
     Recycled Language
     Could Be True
     Extreme Language
     Right Answer, Wrong Question
     Opposite
     Half-Right

 On poetry questions, keep your cool—just because the lines follow a
 meter and rhyme doesn’t mean you can’t still find claims and statements.
 Be aware of poetic contractions and how poets use analogies, similes,
 and metaphors.

 In non-literature texts, most sentences serve as background information,
 a claim, an objection, or evidence. Understanding the role of each
 sentence can help you find the right information needed to answer your
 question even if you aren’t exactly sure what’s happening in the text
 overall.
Don’t forget your POOD! It may be worth marking or even using your
LOTD on a tough Vocabulary question, a tricky poem, a dense paragraph,
or if you’ve simply spent too long debating two answers. There will be
plenty of other questions in the module to use these skills on!
Chapter 10
Comprehensive Reading Drill
Use your new reading comprehension and test-taking skills on the following
drill, which features at least one of each of the eight question types.
Remember to read actively and use the Reading Basic Approach for all 11
examples.
Comprehensive Reading Drill
Answers can be found starting on this page.

  1.      Mark for Review
       While most fiction writers edit their stories and re-write them when
       faced with challenging narrative obstacles, Argentine author César
       Aira __________ the traditional revision process, choosing instead to
       construct creative solutions to tricky narrative problems rather than
       simply cut anything that he has already written.

       Which choice completes the text with the most logical and precise
       word or phrase?

          A allows

          B avoids

          C embraces

          D integrates


  2.      Mark for Review
       While Navajo musician Klee Benally is perhaps best known for his
       role as lead vocalist and guitarist for the band Blackfire, he is also a
       documentary filmmaker and activist. One of his films, The Snowball
       Effect, cautioned against the possible __________ impact of a
       proposed ski resort on sacred tribal lands in Arizona.

       Which choice completes the text with the most logical and precise
       word or phrase?

          A aesthetic
       B detrimental

       C economic

       D restorative


3.      Mark for Review
     The following text is from Anne Virginia Culbertson’s 1904 short story
     “How Mr. Terrapin Lost His Beard.”

     The “cook-house” stood at some little distance from the “big
     house,” and every evening after supper it was full of light and
     noise and laughter. The light came from the fire on the huge
     hearth, above which hung the crane and the great iron pots which
     Eliza, the cook, declared were indispensable in the practice of
     her art. To be sure, there was a cook-stove, but ‘Liza was
     wedded to old ways and maintained there was nothing “stove
     cooked” that could hope to rival the rich and nutty flavor of ash
     cake, or greens “b’iled slow an’ long over de ha’th, wid a piece
     er bacon in de pot.”

     As used in the text, what does the word “practice” most nearly mean?

       A Amusement

       B Recital

       C Execution

       D Appraisal


4.      Mark for Review
     Invented in 1775, Scheele’s green (CuHAsO3) is an acidic copper
     arsenite that creates a vivid emerald-green pigment and is dangerous to
     humans. Used in wallpaper and candles in Victorian-era England, the
     arsenite was completely phased out by the late 1800s, as the public
     gained knowledge of how toxic its vapors were. However, after the
     turn of the century, Scheele’s green reappeared as an effective
     insecticide and, controversially, as a food dye to create bright green
     candy.

     Which choice best describes the overall structure of the text?

        A It describes an invention and then gives specific reasons for
           its continued use.

        B It describes a hypothesis concerning a compound and then
           contradicts that hypothesis.

        C It introduces a product and then discusses both the uses and
           the dangers associated with that product.

        D It explains the initial purpose of an invention and then
           questions the ethics behind that invention.


5.      Mark for Review
     Text 1
     Binge-watching, or viewing multiple episodes of a show at once,
     became popular with the widespread availability of internet streaming
     services in the early twenty-first century. Clinical psychologist Dr. John
     Mayer explains that binge-watching can serve as a form of stress relief
     for viewers. According to Dr. Mayer, the experience of disconnecting
     from the real world through an extended viewing session triggers the
     release of dopamine, a chemical, from the brain, which leads to
     feelings of relaxation and pleasure.
     Text 2
     Clinical psychologist Dr. Renee Carr warns that any activity that
     produces dopamine can potentially be dangerous if an individual
     engages in the behavior too frequently and becomes dependent on the
     desirable feelings it produces. She notes that while dopamine is not
     addictive in and of itself, a form of addiction can take hold whenever
     an individual develops a need for any activity, including binge-
     watching, no matter how harmless that activity might seem.

     Based on the texts, how would Dr. Renee Carr (Text 2) most likely
     respond to Dr. John Mayer’s observations (Text 1)?

       A She would argue that binge-watching can have very
         different effects on people depending on the subject matter
         being viewed.

       B She would point out that the long-term effects of binge-
          watching will be negative for streaming companies as well.

       C She would suggest that Dr. Mayer compare the dopamine
          effects of binge-watching to the dopamine effects
          experienced as the result of engaging in other kinds of
          pleasurable activities.

       D She would suggest that frequent binge-watching may not
         have an entirely positive effect upon an individual.


6.      Mark for Review
     The following text is from the 1914 short story “A Mother” by James
     Joyce. Mrs. Kearney, the mother of local pianist Kathleen Kearney, is
     being discussed.
     She had been educated in a high-class convent, where she had
     learned French and music. As she was naturally pale and
     unbending in manner she made few friends at school. When she
     came to the age of marriage she was sent out to many houses
     where her playing and ivory manners were much admired. She
     sat amid the chilly circle of her accomplishments, waiting for
     some suitor to brave it and offer her a brilliant life. But the
     young men whom she met were ordinary and she gave them no
     encouragement, trying to console her romantic desires by eating
     a great deal of Turkish Delight in secret.

     According to the text, what is true about Mrs. Kearney?

       A Mrs. Kearney had certain standards regarding a potential
         husband.

       B Mrs. Kearney’s desperation to marry was obvious to those
         around her.

       C Mrs. Kearney was criticized for treating potential suitors
         rudely.

       D Mrs. Kearney sometimes disapproved of the behavior of her
         would-be suitors.


7.      Mark for Review
     In one of their numerous studies on invasive species, researcher Satu
     Ramula and her team in Finland planted a mixture of North American
     and Finnish garden lupines (lupinus polyphyllus) into Finnish soil to
     examine the impact of soil microbiota (bacteria that live in a plant’s
     root system) on the plant’s growth and development. One crop was
     planted into nutrient-poor soil that contained microbiota from local
     lupine populations, while the other crop was planted into nutrient-poor
     soil that contained no microbiota. Regardless of the country of origin,
     the crop of garden lupines in the soil containing microbiota not only
     grew much larger than the other crop’s lupines, but also secreted a
     much stronger scent that is a natural deterrent to snails, the garden
     lupine’s most common predator.

     Which choice best states the main idea of the text?

       A It discusses the study by Ramula and her team to examine
          one possible reason that garden lupines are able to grow
          and thrive.

       B It details the study by Ramula and her team to critique other
          researchers for ignoring the impact of soil microbiota on
          garden lupines.

       C It argues that the effects of soil microbiota on garden lupines
          are often difficult to observe, as was the case with Ramula
          and her team’s study.

       D It explains a significant threat to the environment caused by
          garden lupines that the study by Ramula and her team
          attempted to address.


8.      Mark for Review
      Approximate Appearance Percentage for Three Blood Types in Four
                                Regions

                      Region           O+          A+          B+
             Asia                     37%         28%         25%
             Americas                 55%         28%          9%
             Africa                   47%         27%         17%
             Oceania                  42%         33%          11%

     Blood is critical to the function of the human body, as it delivers
     nutrients to vital organs, exchanges carbon dioxide and oxygen, and
     moves white blood cells through the circulatory system to fight
     infections. Blood is often categorized by one of eight blood types,
     which are referred to first by a letter or letter combination (A, B, AB,
     or O) and then a positive or negative marker (such as O+ or AB−.)
     Researcher Anshool Deshmukh compiled blood type data from
     thousands of individuals and reorganized the data by region to better
     understand the distribution of the blood types O+, A+, and B+ by
     region. His research shows that type O+ blood has the highest
     frequency of occurrence in all four regions researched, while type B+
     blood in turn has the lowest frequency of occurrence. For example,
     whereas the approximate appearance percentage for type O+ blood in
     Asia was 37%, the approximate appearance percentage for
     __________.

     Which choice most effectively uses data from the table to complete the
     example?

        A type O+ blood in the Americas was 55%.

        B type B+ blood in Africa was 17%.

        C type O+ blood in Oceania was 42%.

        D type B+ blood in Asia was 25%.


9.      Mark for Review
     “John G.” is a 1918 short story by Katherine Mayo. In the story, the
     narrator describes a horse named John G. as dependable and well-
     behaved: __________.
      Which quotation from “John G.” most effectively illustrates the claim?

        A “In the time that goes to saddling a horse, the detail rode
           into the storm, First Sergeant Price on John G., leading.”

        B “Delicately, nervously, John G. set his feet, step by step, till
           he had reached the centre of the second plank.”

        C “John G., on that diluvian night, was twenty-two years old,
           and still every whit as clean-limbed, alert, and plucky as
           his salad days had seen him.”

        D “And John G. is a gentleman and a soldier, every inch of
           him. Horse-show judges have affixed their seal to the self-
           evident fact by the sign of the blue ribbon, but the best
           proof lies in the personal knowledge of “A” Troop,
           soundly built on twelve years’ brotherhood.”


10.      Mark for Review
            Obedience Rates After Training for 3 Behaviors in Dogs, by
                            Reinforcement Schedule

       Behavior              Fixed      Variable       Fixed        Variable
                             ratio     ratio (VR)     interval    interval (VI)
                             (FR)                       (FI)
       Sitting on            90%          71%           65%           60%
       command
       Fetching on           86%          66%           54%           46%
       command
       Remaining quiet       78%          64%           63%           53%
       on command
      Behavior modification through positive reinforcement, which is
      essentially the rewarding of desired behavior, can occur by means of
      four different reinforcement schedules: a fixed ratio (FR) schedule
      rewards behavior after a specific number of responses, a fixed interval
      (FI) schedule rewards behavior after a specific amount of time, a
      variable ratio (VR) schedule rewards behavior after a varying number
      of responses, and a variable interval (VI) schedule rewards behavior
      after a varying amount of time. An animal trainer compiled data that
      indicate that dogs will exhibit higher rates of obedience for a given
      behavior, such as sitting or fetching, when trained on a ratio schedule
      than when trained on an interval schedule for that same behavior. For
      example, whereas the average obedience rate for sitting after training
      on a VR schedule is 71%, the average obedience rate for __________.

      Which choice most effectively uses data from the table to complete the
      example?

        A fetching after a VR schedule is 66%.

        B sitting after an FR schedule is 90%.

        C fetching after a VI schedule is 46%.

        D sitting after a VI schedule is 60%.


11.      Mark for Review
      Clostridium botulinum (C. botulinum) is a spore-forming food-borne
      bacterium that releases a highly dangerous neurotoxin, often causing
      serious illness or death. Boiling food for 10 minutes will kill C.
      botulinum in the unlikely event that it is present, but this will also
      destroy many beneficial vitamins and minerals. Since C. botulinum is
      almost exclusively found in home-canned goods, some experts
recommend eating only commercially-produced cans of food,
consequently __________.

Which choice most logically completes the text?

  A avoiding the ingestion of C. botulinum without losing
     healthful nutrients.

  B making C. botulinum more vulnerable to the effects of
    boiling.

  C maximizing the many health benefits of C. botulinum.

  D enabling safe consumption of food tainted with C.
     botulinum.
COMPREHENSIVE READING DRILL
ANSWERS AND EXPLANATIONS
1.   B

     This is a Vocabulary question, as it’s asking for a word that completes
     the text with the most logical word or phrase. Read the text and
     highlight what can help fill in the blank. The text states that most fiction
     writers edit their stories and re-write them, but the transition word
     While sets up a contrast, meaning that Aira does not edit his stories and
     re-write them as other writers do. Based on this, a good phrase to enter
     into the annotation box would be that Aira “stays away from” the
     traditional revision process.

          (A), (C), and (D) are wrong because they are the Opposite of
          “stays away from” in some way—they all deal with some form of
          acceptance or joining together.

          (B) is correct because avoids matches “stays away from.”

2.   B

     This is a Vocabulary question, as it’s asking for a word that completes
     the text with the most logical word or phrase. Read the text and
     highlight what can help to fill in the blank. The impact that the blank is
     describing is something that Benally cautioned against, so a good
     word for our annotation box would be “negative” or “harmful.”

          (A) and (C) are wrong because aesthetic and economic don’t
          match with “negative.”

          (B) is correct because detrimental matches with “negative.”

          (D) is wrong because restorative is a positive word, which is the
          Opposite of “negative.”
3.   C

     This is a Vocabulary question, as it’s asking for what a word most
     nearly means. Read the text as if practice were not there and highlight
     what can help to fill in a word in its place. Eliza, the cook, declared
     that the crane and the great iron pots were indispensable to her. This
     most logically means that she must use them to cook (which is her
     “art”), so write “act of doing” in the annotation box.

          (A), (B), and (D) are wrong because amusement, recital, and
          appraisal don’t match with “act of doing.”

          (C) is correct because execution matches with “act of doing.”

4.   C

     This is a Purpose question, as it asks for the overall structure of the
     text. Read the text and highlight what can help understand the order of
     ideas within the text. The first sentence introduces Scheele’s green and
     notes that it is dangerous to humans. The second sentence states that
     Scheele’s green was Used in wallpaper and candles but stopped being
     used when the public gained knowledge of how toxic its vapors were.
     The last sentence discusses Scheele’s green used as an insecticide and
     a food dye. A good overall structure to enter into the annotation box
     would be “Scheele’s green—the good and the bad.”

          (A) is wrong because the text never gives any specific reasons as
          to why Scheele’s green kept getting used, just what it was used for.

          (B) is wrong because the text never mentions any hypothesis.

          (C) is correct because it’s consistent with the highlighting and
          annotation.
         (D) is wrong because it’s Half-Right: the text implies that
         Scheele’s green is first Used for wallpaper and candles, but the
         text does not later question the ethics behind the invention of
         Scheele’s green.

5.   D

     This is a Dual Texts question, as it asks how Dr. Renee Carr would
     mostly likely respond to Dr. John Mayer’s observations. Read Text 1
     and highlight Dr. John Mayer’s observations, which are that binge-
     watching…triggers the release of dopamine, a chemical, from the
     brain, which leads to feelings of relaxation and pleasure. Read Text 2
     and highlight what Dr. Renee Carr says about the same topic. She
     warns that any activity that produces dopamine can potentially be
     dangerous and that a form of addiction can take hold. Therefore, a
     good reply from Dr. Carr to enter into the annotation box would be
     “warn against too much dopamine.”

         (A) is wrong because Text 2 never mentions the subject matter
         being viewed or why it would be important to the argument.

         (B) is wrong because Text 2 never mentions streaming
         companies.

         (C) is wrong because Text 2 never mentions other kinds of
         pleasurable activities, nor does Text 2 directly advise Dr. Mayer
         from Text 1 to compare anything.

         (D) is correct because it’s consistent with the highlighting and
         annotation: may not have an entirely positive effect is the same as
         suggesting there may be negative effects.

6.   A
     This is a Retrieval question, as it says According to the text. Since the
     entire text is about Mrs. Kearney and it may be difficult to highlight a
     single correct answer in the text, first read the text and then compare the
     answer choices to the text directly.

          (A) is correct because the third sentence states that Mrs. Kearney
          was waiting for some suitor to brave it and offer her a brilliant
          life, but the fourth sentence states that the young men whom she
          met were ordinary and she gave them no encouragement. This
          implies that Mrs. Kearney would not just accept any man as a
          husband.

          (B) is wrong because it’s the Opposite of what is stated in the
          third and fourth sentences.

          (C) is wrong because the text never states that anyone criticized
          Mrs. Kearney or that she was rude.

          (D) is wrong because the text never states that Mrs. Kearney
          disapproved of her suitors’ behavior—only that she found them
          ordinary.

7.   A

     This is a Main Idea question, as it says main idea. Read the text and
     highlight the main phrases or lines that all of the other sentences seem
     to support. The author first states that Ramula and her team wanted to
     examine the impact of soil microbiota on the growth and development
     of garden lupines. Later in the text, it’s stated that the crop of garden
     lupines in the soil containing microbiota not only grew much larger
     than the other crop’s lupines, but also secreted a much stronger scent
     that is a natural deterrent to snails, which are a predator of the garden
     lupines. This piece of evidence demonstrates the effect that Ramula and
     her team wanted to examine, so the correct answer should be consistent
     with both of these sentences.

          (A) is correct because it is consistent with the aim and outcome of
          Ramula and her team’s study as described in the text.

          (B) is wrong because no other researchers besides Ramula and
          her team are mentioned in the text, nor does the author of the text
          critique anyone.

          (C) is wrong because it is the Opposite of the text: Ramula and
          her team don’t seem to have any difficulty observing the effects of
          soil microbiota on garden lupines.

          (D) is wrong because it is a Could Be True trap answer: while
          invasive species normally do pose environmental threats, no
          threat from the garden lupines is mentioned in the text.

8.   D

     This is a Charts question as it asks about data from the table. The table
     displays the distribution percentages of three different blood types over
     four different regions. Read the text and highlight the claim or statement
     referencing as many of these ideas as possible. The second to last
     sentence states His research shows that type O+ blood has the highest
     frequency of occurrence in all four regions researched, while type B+
     blood in turn has the lowest frequency of occurrence. The next
     sentence, which is meant to be an example of this claim, starts by
     mentioning that the approximate appearance percentage for type O+
     blood in Asia was 37%. To complete this example, the correct answer
     must reference the other blood type from the claim, B+, and the same
     region to properly compare the frequencies of the two blood types.
          (A), (B), and (C) are wrong because each references the wrong
          region: to complete the example, they should mention the same
          region, Asia, which is in the first half of the example. Choices (A)
          and (C) could also be eliminated for referencing the wrong blood
          type, O+, when that blood type has already been included in the
          first half of the example.

          (D) is correct because it is consistent with the claim and the table
          by completing the example, providing a statistic from the table that
          shows that B+ blood has the lowest frequency of occurrence in
          Asia.

9.   D

     This is a Claims question, as it asks for a quotation that would most
     effectively illustrate the claim. Read the text and highlight the claim,
     which is that the narrator describes a horse named John G. as
     dependable and well-behaved. The correct answer will be as
     consistent as possible with this claim.

          (A), (B), and (C) are wrong because they do not describe John G.
          as dependable and well-behaved, even if they list other positive
          qualities about him.

          (D) is correct because the quotation calls John G. a gentleman
          and a soldier and states that John G.’s reputation is soundly built
          on twelve years’ brotherhood.

10. D

     This is a Charts question, as it asks for data from the table to complete
     an example. Read the title and variables in the table. Then, read the
     text and highlight the claim and example being made in the text. The
     animal trainer compiled data that indicate that dogs will exhibit higher
   rates of obedience for a given behavior…when trained on a ratio
   schedule than when trained on an interval schedule for that same
   behavior. The example begins with the average obedience rate for
   sitting after training on a VR schedule is 71%, The correct answer
   will complete this example while remaining consistent with the claim
   as well as the table.

        (A) and (C) are wrong because fetching is the wrong behavior—
        the claim states that the comparison needs to be for the same
        behavior, and the example uses sitting, not fetching.

        (B) is wrong because the claim compares a ratio schedule (which
        is already in the example) to an interval schedule, but FR stands
        for fixed ratio, making it another ratio schedule.

        (D) is correct because it’s consistent with the highlighting and
        table: it has both the right behavior, sitting, and an interval
        schedule, VI, or variable interval.

11. A

   This is a Conclusions question, as it asks for an answer that most
   logically completes the text. Read the text and highlight the main ideas.
   The first sentence states that Clostridium botulinum…releases a
   highly dangerous neurotoxin. The second sentence states that Boiling
   food for 10 minutes will kill C. botulinum, but this will also destroy
   many beneficial vitamins and minerals. The last sentence states that C.
   botulinum is almost exclusively found in home-canned goods, so
   some experts recommend eating only commercially-produced cans of
   food. Connecting these points together, if unlike home-canned goods,
   commercially-produced cans of foods are less likely to have C.
   botulinum, they are also less likely to require boiling for 10 minutes,
   which will avoid the potential loss of beneficial vitamins and minerals.
(A) is correct because it’s consistent with the highlighting and the
flow of ideas within the text.

(B) is wrong because it’s Recycled Language, misusing boiling
from a different part of the text.

(C) is wrong because it’s the Opposite of the text: C. botulinum is
highly dangerous. It does not have many health benefits.

(D) is wrong because it’s also the Opposite of the text:
commercially-produced cans are extremely unlikely to have C.
botulinum in the first place.
Chapter 11
Introduction to Rules Questions
You can expect your test to contain 11–19 questions in a category that
College Board calls Standard English Conventions. We simply call these
Rules questions, as they test grammar and punctuation rules. In the next five
chapters, you’ll learn all the rules you need to know in order to ace these
questions.
LEARN THE RULES AND FOLLOW THEM
Rules questions cover lots of different topics: punctuation, subject-verb
agreement, pronouns and nouns, verb tense, sentence construction,
apostrophes, and more. However, College Board does not categorize these
topics separately from one another, as all of the Rules questions will appear
in order of difficulty, with the topics mixed up. That means that, unlike every
other portion of the Reading and Writing section, the Rules part does not
group the questions by topic or type. Remember, you can identify Rules
questions by their common question:

      Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the
      conventions of Standard English?

What’s tricky about Rules questions is there’s no way to know which rule is
being tested by reading the text. In fact, it may be difficult to understand the
text because some of the words that should be in a sentence have been
replaced by a blank. What’s a savvy student to do?


                      Rules Questions Basic Approach

          1. Look at the answers to see what’s changing and
             determine the topic.
          2. Apply the rules associated with that topic.
          3. Use Process of Elimination.


Following the Reading and Writing basic approach that we went over earlier,
you should always be looking at the question to determine where you are in
the section and what category of question you’re dealing with. Once you find
the standard question for Rules, look at the answer choices to see what’s
changing. That will allow you to figure out what the question is testing you
on.

If all the words stay the same but punctuation changes, you know you’re
being tested on punctuation rules. If each answer choice contains the same
verb but in a different tense, that’s your cue to think about tense—and ignore
anything else you might like to change in the sentence, as it’s not being tested
on that question. You may not even need to read all of the sentences in the text
if some of them don’t pertain to what’s being tested.

As you work through the chapters in the Rules section of this book, you may
find that some categories of questions come more naturally to you. Perhaps
you had a teacher who drilled subject-verb agreement into you or you don’t
have difficulty deciding between a semicolon and a comma. Or, perhaps you
find that a topic that was previously challenging or unfamiliar now makes
perfect sense after working through our lessons and exercises. Whatever the
case may be, if you identify any topics that you tend to do well on, as well as
any questions that you know you tend to struggle with, remember to follow
your Personal Order of Difficulty. Even though the Rules questions are
intended to follow a rough order of difficulty, the mix of topics means that
you may find it benefits you to skip around and do the ones you find easier
first.


TOOLS FOR RULES
Remember, if you decide to skip around within the Rules section, you’ll be
able to use the Mark for Review tool if you come across a question that
probably does fall within your POOD but that you don’t want to do right that
second. Likewise, mark a question if you are stuck between two options or if
you think you’d benefit from looking at the question a second time after a few
minutes. Sometimes, an answer choice might sound perfectly fine, but when
you read it again a little later you instantly spot an error.
The Highlight and Annotate tools will also be extremely helpful on Rules
questions. As you’ll soon learn, consistency is key on grammar topics.
Highlighting the words that the blank needs to be consistent with will help
you to avoid making mistakes. You can also make annotations to remind
yourself what type of word you’re looking for (such as singular or plural).

Lastly, Process of Elimination using the Answer Eliminator tool will be
extremely helpful on this portion of the test. You won’t necessarily know
what you are looking for in the answers to these questions, so eliminating
answers that don’t work will lead you to the one answer that does.

In the Writing chapters of this book, we don’t mention using scratch paper, as
we think the online tools are sufficient for our strategies. That being said, we
always encourage students to find techniques that work for them. If you find
that scratch paper is helpful for you on this section, go right ahead and use it
to your heart’s content. Just make sure your work is neat and organized, so
you can come back to a question later if you need to.

In the following lessons, you’ll learn all the rules that you need to apply
when you see each topic appear in the answer choices. But first, try this drill
to practice identifying what’s changing in the answers and therefore what the
question is testing.


WHAT’S CHANGING IN THE ANSWERS DRILL

   1.    Mark for Review
        A babies’ favorite bottles

        B baby’s favorite bottle’s

        C babies’ favorite bottles’

        D baby’s favorite bottles
What’s changing in the answer choices?

What is this question testing?

   2.    Mark for Review
        A have done

        B has done

        C were doing

        D do

What’s changing in the answer choices?

What is this question testing?

   3.    Mark for Review
        A standing; with

        B standing. With

        C standing, with

        D standing with

What’s changing in the answer choices?

What is this question testing?

   4.    Mark for Review
        A their
        B they’re

        C it’s

        D its

What’s changing in the answer choices?

What is this question testing?

   5.    Mark for Review
        A approaches

        B had approached

        C was approaching

        D approached

What’s changing in the answer choices?

What is this question testing?

   6.    Mark for Review
        A today’s experience of culture is largely shaped by dime
           novels.

        B we experience culture the way we do because of dime
          novels.

        C dime novels have shaped the way we experience culture
           today.
        D the shape of dime novels influences cultural experiences.

What’s changing in the answer choices?

What is this question testing?


WHAT’S CHANGING IN THE ANSWERS DRILL
ANSWERS
   1. Apostrophes with nouns; plural versus possessive nouns
   2. Verbs; verb tense and/or number
   3. Punctuation; how to connect clauses
   4. Apostrophes with pronouns; pronoun agreement and possessive
      pronouns versus contractions
   5. Verbs; verb tense and/or number
   6. Subjects of the phrases; modifiers
Chapter 12
Rules Questions: Complete Sentences
Even though the Rules questions cover a variety of topics related to
punctuation, grammar, and style, they all ultimately test you on how to
properly construct a sentence. So, in this chapter we’re going to start at the
very beginning with how to write a basic sentence.
WHAT DOES A SENTENCE NEED?
At its most basic, a sentence needs a subject and a verb. Here are some
examples with the subjects circled and the verbs underlined:

     The dog eats.         ✓

      Malia will sing.         ✓

      Snow was falling.            ✓

                Throughout the Writing portion of the book, you’ll see
                a ✓ or an x next to many of the example sentences
                so that you can easily tell whether they are correctly
                or incorrectly written.


Not all verbs can work in this structure, however. For example, a word like
give or want requires an object, which is a word that in these examples
would tell what someone gives or wants. It wouldn’t make sense to say
Jackson wants, would it? Here are two of the same examples but with
objects added and put in boxes:

     The dog eats peanut butter .               ✓

      Malia will sing the national anthem .                  ✓

An object typically follows a verb, and it answers the question What does
the dog eat? or What will Malia sing?, for example.

                You may remember learning about direct versus
                indirect objects in school, but this distinction isn’t
                important for the Digital SAT.


As you already know, a sentence must end in a period. The exceptions are
questions, which end in question marks, and exclamations or commands,
which can end with exclamation marks. Exclamation marks aren’t tested on
the Digital SAT, but questions occasionally are, so let’s take a look at
question construction.


ANSWER IN THE FORM OF A QUESTION
A topic that is occasionally tested on the Digital SAT is questions versus
statements. The question will ask you to determine whether the blank should
be a question or a statement. These ones can be pretty easy as long as you
know the difference between questions and statements. A statement
provides information. A question asks for information. Let’s see an example.




   1.      Mark for Review
        Gammalsvenskby is a small Ukrainian village that experienced a mass
        migration of Swedes from Estonia around 1780. Historians wonder
        whether the mass migration was a punishment forced upon these people
        or _______.

        Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the conventions
        of Standard English?

          A did it provide positive opportunities for them?

          B a choice that provided positive opportunities for them.

          C a choice that provided positive opportunities for them?

          D did it provide positive opportunities for them.


Here’s How to Crack It
First, recognize based on the question that this is a Rules question, so look at
the answers to see what’s changing. Two answers end in question marks and
two end in periods, so this is testing questions versus statements. Look at the
text to determine whether it’s intended to be a question or a statement. The
sentence starts with Historians wonder, so it’s providing information and is
therefore a statement, not a question. Eliminate (A) and (C). Next, determine
which wording is correct. In a question, the verb comes first, and a two-
word verb (like did provide) is split—just like (D). This shouldn’t be a
question, so (D) isn’t phrased correctly. Thus, the correct answer is (B).




THE PERFECT FORM
You saw earlier how every sentence needs a subject and a verb. Let’s take a
closer look at what those subjects and verbs can look like. A subject is
usually a noun or pronoun: dog, tree, Mya, they, swimming. You might be
thinking, “Hold on—I thought swimming was a verb!” Of course, it can be a
verb in some contexts (She is swimming), but an -ing verb can also function
as a noun. See the following example:

      Swimming is my favorite sport.             ✓

The word swimming in this context refers to an act or a sport, so it functions
as a noun and is the subject of this sentence. So, subjects can be nouns,
pronouns, or -ing verbs.

                 When an -ing verb functions as a noun, it’s known
                 as a gerund. But you don’t need to know this term
                 for the Digital SAT.


What about the verb in a sentence? As you know, a verb can come in
different tenses—think danced versus dances versus will dance. But verbs
can also come in different forms, such as dances, dancing, and to dance. Not
all of these can be “the verb” in a sentence, so it’s important to know which
verbs can and can’t be. Now that we’ve established that a sentence must
contain a subject and a verb, we’re going to call that verb the “main verb.” A
sentence can have other verbs in it within different phrases or clauses, but it
must have a main verb to go along with the subject. Here’s the rule to know
for the Digital SAT:


          An -ing or “to” verb cannot be the main verb in a sentence.


Let’s see some examples.

       He dances after school on Fridays.        ✓

       He dancing after school on Fridays.        x

       He to dance after school on Fridays.        x

Now that you’ve seen these examples, you can probably tell that you
intuitively knew this rule, as the second and third sentences should sound
really wrong. However, it won’t always be this obvious on the Digital SAT.
Let’s see an example.




  2.      Mark for Review
       American inventor Otis Boykin’s mother died of heart failure when
       Boykin was a year old. He earned many patents for electronic control
       devices, including for artificial cardiac pacemakers. These pacemakers
       _______ electrical impulses to regulate a patient’s heartbeat.

       Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the conventions
       of Standard English?

         A having used
        B using

        C use

        D to use




Here’s How to Crack It
Start by identifying the category: Rules. Then, look at the answers to see
what’s changing. Since there is a “to” verb and an -ing verb, the question is
testing verb forms. Start by identifying the subject: pacemakers. Then, look
to see whether the sentence contains a main verb to go with this subject.
There is no verb in the sentence other than to regulate, which can’t be the
main verb since it’s in the “to” form. Thus, the blank must contain the main
verb. Eliminate (A), (B), and (D) because neither an -ing verb nor a “to”
verb can be the main verb in a sentence—they would not produce a complete
sentence. Therefore, the correct answer is (C).

When this topic is tested, you will almost always see a “to” verb (known as
the infinitive) and at least one -ing verb in the answer choices. That’s how
you can spot that the question is not testing you on tense but rather on
complete sentences. When should you use the “to” form or the -ing verb?
Here are some examples:

      I want to ride on the roller coaster.    ✓

      They are on a mission to find double-stick tape.      ✓

      Emma wore her lucky sweater on test day, thinking it would
      give her an edge.  ✓

As you can see, the “to” verb is not the main verb in the example sentences.
In some cases, it follows the main verb idiomatically (meaning, as a set
phrase), such as want to, need to, have to, like to, or choose to. In other
cases, it’s used with a noun, such as a mission to, a hope to, a wish to,
courage to, or tendency to. An -ing verb can be used within a separate
phrase or clause that describes someone or something. In the example above,
thinking isn’t the main verb in the sentence, but it begins a phrase that
describes Emma (she is thinking).

                 Always check whether the sentence already has a
                 main verb. If it does not, then the blank needs to
                 provide the main verb. The “to” or -ing form can only
                 be correct if the sentence already has a main verb.


It’s worth noting that an -ing verb can be part of the main verb in a sentence.
Here are some examples:

      He is jogging in the park.           ✓

      The competitors were preparing their notes.                 ✓

In these examples, there is another verb that is allowed to function as the
main verb—is and were, respectively. Remember, if you see the -ing word
by itself, it can’t be the main verb in the sentence.

A sentence can also have two or more verbs that either apply to the same
subject or are part of a list:

      The athletes are running laps, lifting weights, and studying
      technique.     ✓

      The job consists of filing papers, taking phone calls, and
      assisting clients.    ✓

As you can see from these correct examples, the verbs must be in the same
form when they are applied to the same subject or are part of a list. Here are
some incorrect examples:
        The athletes are running, lift weights, and to study techniques.
            x

        The job consists of filing papers, to take phone calls, and
        assists clients.   x

Let’s see how this could be tested on the Digital SAT.




   3.      Mark for Review
        Researchers were surprised to find white spruce trees growing in the
        Alaskan tundra. The spread of white spruce trees is part of Arctic
        greening, a phenomenon in which vegetation moves farther north as the
        region warms. White spruce seeds can travel long distances and
        _______ areas with little competition, leading to their rapid population
        increase.

        Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the conventions
        of Standard English?

          A accessed

          B accessing

          C access

          D accesses


Here’s How to Crack It
Identify the category based on the question: Rules. Next, look at the answers
to see what’s changing: verb forms. When verbs are changing in the answer
choices, always locate the subject of the sentence. Here, it’s white spruce
seeds. The sentence contains a verb for the subject, can travel, but notice that
after that is the word and. There’s no second subject after and, so the
underlined portion must be another verb that goes with the same subject.
Since the first verb is can travel, the underlined portion must be in the same
form as travel. Eliminate (A), (B), and (D) because they aren’t in the same
form as travel. Choice (C) is in the correct form: with this answer, the
sentence says White spruce seeds can travel…and access…which is
consistent. The correct answer is (C).
Complete Sentences Drill
Answers can be found starting on this page.

Time: 6 minutes

  1.      Mark for Review
       The Bumblebee Conservation Trust’s BeeWalk project is a citizen
       science project where volunteers collect information about
       bumblebees. Researchers combine the citizen science data with land
       cover data to learn where bumblebees live. If the particular types of
       habitats bumblebees live in are identified, _________ That is the
       question that researchers like Dr. Penelope Whitehorn are trying to
       answer.

       Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the conventions
       of Standard English?

         A conservation efforts could be more directed and successful?

         B conservation efforts could be more directed and successful.

         C could conservation efforts be more directed and successful?

         D could conservation efforts be more directed and successful.


  2.      Mark for Review
       Egyptologist Howard Carter led the excavations that discovered the
       tomb of the pharaoh Tutankhamun in 1922. At this time, the Egyptians
       had recently gained some independence from the British. The timings of
       the discovery and these political changes led many to wonder
       _________.
     Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the conventions
     of Standard English?

       A whether the Egyptians or the British should control access
         to the tomb?

       B should the Egyptians or the British control access to the
          tomb?

       C the Egyptians or the British to control access to the tomb.

       D whether the Egyptians or the British should control access
         to the tomb.


3.      Mark for Review
     The idea of the Great American Novel, a novel that considers the
     national character and essence of the United States, dates from the
     1800s. In the early 1900s, many _________ that the idea of the Great
     American Novel was out of date, but since the 1920s, this concept has
     re-emerged among literary circles.

     Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the conventions
     of Standard English?

       A believed

       B believing

       C to believe

       D having believed


4.      Mark for Review
     As one of the highest-ranking women working for the government in her
     time, Mary Margaret O’Reilly served as the Assistant Director of the
     United States Bureau of the Mint from 1924 through 1938. When her
     mandatory retirement came due in 1935, President Franklin D.
     Roosevelt felt she was too valuable and _________ adjustments to
     allow her to serve for three additional years.

     Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the conventions
     of Standard English?

       A having made

       B making

       C to make

       D made


5.      Mark for Review
     Ada Yonath is a crystallographer from Israel who focused on the
     structure of ribosomes. She identified the mechanisms surrounding how
     antibiotics attack ribosomes and then _________ the Nobel Prize in
     Chemistry, alongside Thomas A. Steitz and Venkatraman Ramakrishnan.

     Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the conventions
     of Standard English?

       A receives

       B will receive

       C receive

       D received
COMPLETE SENTENCES DRILL ANSWERS
AND EXPLANATIONS
1.   C

     In this Rules question, periods and question marks are changing in the
     answer choices, so it’s testing questions versus statements. The
     following sentence states that researchers like Dr. Penelope Whitehorn
     are trying to answer a question, so the preceding sentence should be a
     question. Eliminate answers that aren’t correctly written as questions.

          (A) is wrong because it has a question mark but is written as a
          statement.

          (B) and (D) are wrong because they are statements.

          (C) is correct because it’s correctly written as a question.

2.   D

     In this Rules question, periods and question marks are changing in the
     answer choices, so it’s testing questions versus statements. The
     beginning of the sentence provides a statement that says The timings of
     the discovery and these political changes led many to wonder, so the
     second part of the sentence should be a statement. Eliminate answers
     that aren’t correctly written as statements.

          (A) and (B) are wrong because they are questions.

          (C) is wrong because, although it is a statement, it makes the
          sentence incomplete.

          (D) is correct because it’s correctly written as a statement that
          makes the sentence complete.

3.   A
     In this Rules question, verb forms are changing in the answer choices,
     so it’s testing sentence structure. In this case, the blank represents the
     main verb for the subject many. If the main verb is in the wrong form,
     the sentence won’t be complete. Eliminate any answer that does not
     produce a complete sentence.

          (A) is correct because it’s in the right form to make a complete
          sentence.

          (B) and (D) are wrong because an -ing verb can’t be the main
          verb in a sentence.

          (C) is wrong because a “to” verb can’t be the main verb in a
          sentence.

4.   D

     In this Rules question, verb forms are changing in the answer choices,
     so it’s testing sentence structure. In this case, the blank represents a
     second main verb for the subject President Franklin D. Roosevelt. If the
     main verb is in the wrong form, the sentence won’t be complete.
     Eliminate any answer that does not produce a complete sentence.

          (A) and (B) are wrong because an -ing verb can’t be the main
          verb in a sentence.

          (C) is wrong because a “to” verb can’t be the main verb in a
          sentence.

          (D) is correct because it’s in the right form to make a complete
          sentence.

5.   D
In this Rules question, verbs are changing in the answer choices, so it’s
testing consistency with verbs. In this case, the verb is part of a list of
two things that Yonath accomplished, the first of which is She
identified. Highlight the word identified, which the verb in the answer
should be consistent with. Eliminate any answer that isn’t consistent
with identified.

     (A), (B), and (C) are wrong because receives, will receive, and
     receive aren’t consistent with identified.

     (D) is correct because received is in the same tense and form as
     identified.
Summary
 A complete sentence must have a subject and a verb.

 Statements provide information, while questions ask for information.

 Neither an -ing verb nor a “to” verb can be the main verb in a sentence.

 Two verbs that apply to the same subject must be in the same form.
Chapter 13
Rules Questions: Describing Phrases
A writer is not always satisfied with a basic sentence like the ones we
showed you in the last chapter. In this chapter, we’ll take a look at common
ways to include additional information in a sentence. Some of these pieces of
information require commas, while others don’t. In this chapter, you’ll learn
about Specifying and Extra Information and how to identify and correctly
punctuate them.
WHO OR WHAT ARE YOU TALKING ABOUT?
We’ll begin with the information that should not have commas separating it
from other parts of the sentence. Here’s our first example:

      Mae Jemison became interested in space in part because of
      Lieutenant Uhura.   ✓

This is a complete sentence, but it’s not a great topic sentence. That’s
because it doesn’t actually introduce who we’re talking about. If you don’t
know who Mae Jemison or Lieutenant Uhura is, you may be wondering why
we bothered to tell you this. So, let’s add some additional details to make
this sentence more meaningful:

      Astronaut Mae Jemison became interested in space in part
      because of Star Trek character Lieutenant Uhura.    ✓

This sentence makes a lot more sense, doesn’t it? Digital SAT texts will not
assume that you are familiar with the often obscure people and events they
are describing, so you’ll typically see titles and labels that appear before a
person’s name, a book title, or any other noun that needs to be explained. As
you can see, these titles function like adjectives to describe the noun, so there
is no punctuation used between the title and the name.


          Labels that precede a person’s name, a book title, or any
          other potentially unfamiliar noun are never followed by a
                                   comma.


Let’s see an example of how this can be tested on the Digital SAT.
  1.      Mark for Review
       The understanding of cancer genomics was greatly expanded by
       _______ Bert Vogelstein, a doctor whose research on colorectal cancer
       has led to identifying numerous genes associated with cancer and new
       tools to diagnose cancer earlier.

       Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the conventions
       of Standard English?

         A scientist,

         B scientist;

         C scientist:

         D scientist


Here’s How to Crack It
First identify the category: Rules. In that case, look at the answers to see
what’s changing. The punctuation is changing, so the question is testing
punctuation rules. The word scientist comes before a person’s name. Is Bert
Vogelstein a scientist? Yes, he’s a doctor who has done research. Thus, the
word scientist is a title that precedes Vogelstein’s name. Remember, there’s
no need for punctuation in that case. Eliminate (A), (B), and (C). The correct
answer is (D).



There are other kinds of phrases that are important enough in the sentence that
they don’t get commas. We call these phrases Specifying Information. Here’s
an example:

       The person who sold me my bike offered to give me a
       discount.   ✓
      The person , who sold me my bike, offered to give me a
      discount.     x

By separating the phrase from the sentence with commas, the second example
implies that this information isn’t essential to the sentence’s meaning—as
you’ll learn later on, information that could be removed without affecting the
sentence’s meaning should be surrounded by commas, dashes, or parentheses.
But if we remove the phrase, it says The person offered to give me a
discount. Which person? While this is a complete sentence without the
phrase, it’s not clear who we are talking about. So, the phrase shouldn’t be
separated by punctuation. It specifies which person we are talking about.
Here are some more examples of information coming after a noun that
doesn’t get commas:

      The paper airplane that travels farthest will be the
      winner.    ✓

      The dog sniffing the fence is mine.        ✓

      That bakery offers discounts for anyone who has taken a bus
      tour.    ✓

      The backpack on the floor isn’t hers.       ✓

      The girl whose book I borrowed told me not to write in
      it.   ✓

In all of these examples, the phrase that comes after the noun or pronoun
specifies which person or thing we’re talking about. Which paper airplane?
The one that travels farthest. Which dog? The one sniffing the fence. Which
anyone (okay, that doesn’t work grammatically, but you could say “Which
people”)? Those who have taken a bus tour. Which backpack? The one on the
floor. Which girl? The one whose book I borrowed. All of this Specifying
Information is used to specify which person or thing is being discussed.
As you can see from the examples above, Specifying Information can come in
different forms. To make things a bit easier, we’ll give you a couple of rules
that will help with some of the questions that test this topic.


                       Specifying Information Rules

          1. Phrases that begin with “that” are always Specifying and
             never get commas around them.
          2. Prepositional phrases are usually Specifying and don’t
             get commas unless they appear at the beginning of the
             sentence.


Let’s take a closer look at that second rule. First, we need to define a
prepositional phrase, which starts with the definition of preposition. A
preposition is a small, directional word such as in, of, for, by, with, on, or
to. So, a prepositional phrase is a phrase that begins with a preposition, such
as in the house, of my friends, for you, or by the tree. Here’s an example of
how that works with commas:

      Squirrels were playing at the top of the tree.       ✓

      At the top of the tree, squirrels were playing.       ✓

      Squirrels at the top of the tree were playing.       ✓

The prepositional phrase here is at the top of the tree (actually, it’s two
prepositional phrases put together: at the top and of the tree). When it comes
later in the sentence, this phrase is Specifying and isn’t separated from the
sentence with commas. However, when the prepositional phrase comes at the
beginning of the sentence, it is followed by a comma. Without the comma, the
sentence could be a bit confusing because it has tree and squirrels right in a
row. If you read the sentence this way (At the top of the tree squirrels were
playing), it’s easy to miss where the prepositional phrase ends and where the
rest of the sentence begins. For that reason, (see what we did there?)
prepositional phrases are usually followed by commas when they come at the
beginning of the sentence, and they usually do not have commas when they
come elsewhere.

Although this is a “usually” rule, it’s not likely that College Board would test
you on this in a way that isn’t obvious. That’s because this is one of the few
comma rules that is actually reflected in how we speak. You would likely put
a small pause after the prepositional phrase in the second example above, but
you probably wouldn’t have any pause in the other two examples. This will
help you know when to use a comma in this context.


EXTRA! EXTRA! PUT PUNCTUATION
AROUND IT!
We saw earlier that titles that precede a name never have commas. The
exception to this rule is if the description contains the word “a” or “an.”
Here’s an example:

      An astronaut, Mae Jemison became interested in space in
      part because of Star Trek character Lieutenant Uhura.   ✓

A description with “a” or “an” can go before or after the person’s name, but
it must always be separated from the name by commas. In that case, we call it
Extra Information. Let’s see some examples.

      Mae Jemison , an astronaut, became interested in space in
      part because of Lieutenant Uhura, a Star Trek character.
           ✓

      Mae Jemison (an astronaut) became interested in space in
      part because of Lieutenant Uhura, a Star Trek character.
           ✓
      Mae Jemison , an astronaut, became interested in space in
      part because of Lieutenant Uhura—a Star Trek character.
           ✓

All of these examples are correctly punctuated. Both of the names in the
sentence refer to specific people, so the information that follows the names
can be removed without changing the meaning of the sentence. In that case,
it’s Extra Information, and it needs to be separated from the rest of the
sentence using two commas, two parentheses, or two dashes. (Note that if the
Extra Information comes at the beginning or end of the sentence, as in the
case of a Star Trek character above, it only needs a single punctuation mark
to separate it.)

Let’s compare two sentences that are punctuated differently to understand
what they mean:

      An astronaut, Mae Jemison became interested in space in
      part because of Star Trek character Lieutenant Uhura.   ✓

      An astronaut , Mae Jemison, became interested in space in
      part because of Star Trek character Lieutenant Uhura.     ✓

In the first sentence, Mae Jemison is the subject, and an astronaut is simply
giving her a description. In the second sentence, An astronaut is actually the
subject. Since Mae Jemison is separated with commas, it’s Extra
Information, which means that it could be removed from the sentence. This
suggests that in the second example the point is that there was an astronaut
whose interest in space was spurred in part by the Star Trek character, but
her name isn’t important to the author’s point. The first example could be
used if the author is telling us about Jemison. If the author is telling us about
Lieutenant Uhura or Star Trek, however, the second example could be
perfectly fine, as the author only wants us to know that an astronaut was
inspired—who it was isn’t important.
The fact that we just showed you an example of the same sentence with and
without a comma may seem concerning, but don’t worry. College Board will
never give you two answer choices that can both work. You would not see
both of these sentences in the answer choices since they could both be
logical.

Another way to think of the phrase An astronaut in the first example above is
that it is a describing phrase. We saw how describing phrases beginning with
“a” or “an” are followed by a comma. We can call this a noun phrase
because the “a” or “an” always comes before a noun.

There are many other kinds of describing phrases that get commas around
them because they are Extra Information. Let’s see another version of a noun
phrase as well as some examples of other types of describing phrases.

      A noun phrase: Summer , my favorite time of year, is when I go
      to camp.     ✓

      A phrase beginning with an -ing verb: Having stayed up all
      night playing video games, Isaiah was not surprised that he
      felt terrible the next day.   ✓

      A phrase beginning with an -ed verb or an irregular past
      participle (such as forgotten, known, begun, hidden, or kept):
      Located in Maryland, Baltimore has a rich history.         ✓

      A phrase beginning with which, who, whom, or whose or that
      contains a preposition + one of those words (such as of whom or
      in which): Summer , which is my favorite time of year, is when
      I go to camp.     ✓

      A clause with a “to be” verb removed: Ella timidly blew into
      the trumpet, the sound barely audible.     ✓
       A definition or alternative term starting with or: The humerus ,
       or funny bone, is an arm bone that runs from one’s shoulder to
       one’s elbow.      ✓

In some cases, a describing phrase can come either before or after the person
or thing it’s describing. Here are some examples, which you can compare to
the previous ones:

       Isaiah , having stayed up all night playing video games, was
       not surprised that he felt terrible the next day.   ✓

       Baltimore , located in Maryland, has a rich history.      ✓

       My favorite time of year, summer is when I go to camp.         ✓

Remember, most of these types of describing phrases can be either
Specifying or Extra Information. For example, phrases with who are
sometimes needed in order to specify which person is being discussed.
You’ll need to try removing the phrase from the sentence to see whether it’s
needed in order to specify who or what is being discussed. If it’s not needed,
it’s Extra.

Lastly, note that transitions such as however, in addition, moreover, or
therefore are always followed by a comma if they come at the beginning of a
sentence, and they are surrounded by commas if they appear in the middle.
These transitions are considered Extra Information because the sentence still
works without them.

Let’s see some examples of how the Specifying vs. Extra Information topic
can be tested on the Digital SAT.




  2.     Mark for Review
     To measure the flow of pitch (highly viscous liquids which appear
     solid, such as asphalt), scientists use what is known as a pitch drop
     experiment. In this _______ a funnel filled with pitch allows the pitch
     to drop into a container below. In most pitch drop experiments, a single
     drop falls approximately once every ten years.

     Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the conventions
     of Standard English?

        A experiment, the most famous of which was started in 1927
           at the University of Queensland,

        B experiment, the most famous of which was started in 1927 at
           the University of Queensland

        C experiment the most famous of which was started in 1927 at
           the University of Queensland,

        D experiment the most famous of which was started in 1927 at
           the University of Queensland


Here’s How to Crack It
Start by identifying the category, which is Rules, as evidenced by the
question. As per the strategy, look to the answers to see what’s changing: all
the words are the same, but the commas change, and they seem to be
surrounding the phrase the most famous of which was started in 1927 at the
University of Queensland. If this is Extra Information, it does need commas
before and after the phrase. To test, try removing the phrase from the
sentence. Then it reads In this experiment, a funnel filled with pitch allows
the pitch to drop into a container below. This is perfectly fine, so the phrase
is Extra Information and thus needs punctuation before and after. Eliminate
(B), (C), and (D) because they don’t have a comma both before and after.
The correct answer is (A).
   3.      Mark for Review
        In his writings, Vietnamese American poet and novelist Ocean Vuong
        combines the folkloric traditions and oral storytelling of Vietnam and
        experimentation with the English language to explore trauma and
        identity. His poetry collection _______ contains numerous poems about
        the Vietnam War and its effects, while his novel On Earth We’re
        Briefly Gorgeous is written as a letter from a son to his mother and
        explores both personal and colonial histories.

        Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the conventions
        of Standard English?

          A Night Sky with Exit Wounds:

          B Night Sky with Exit Wounds

          C Night Sky with Exit Wounds,

          D Night Sky with Exit Wounds—


Here’s How to Crack It
The question lets you know that this is a Rules question, and the answers
reveal that it’s testing punctuation. Start from the beginning of the sentence: it
says His poetry collection, and the part after gives the name of the
collection. This is a good clue that the question is testing Specifying versus
Extra Information. If the phrase is Specifying, it will not have any punctuation
around it, but if it’s Extra, it will need matching punctuation before and after.
Notice that the part before the blank doesn’t have any punctuation, though.
This proves that the phrase is Specifying, as there’s no way to put any
punctuation before the phrase. Therefore, you can eliminate all of the
answers with punctuation: (A), (C), and (D). The correct answer is (B).




  4.      Mark for Review
       A jazz cellist and composer known for her unique sounds and blend of
       musical _______ Tomeka Reid founded the Chicago Jazz String
       Summit in 2013 and continued to organize it as an annual event.

       Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the conventions
       of Standard English?

         A traditions,

         B traditions;

         C traditions:

         D traditions


Here’s How to Crack It
Look at the question to determine that the category is Rules, and look at the
answers to determine that the topic is punctuation. Start at the beginning of
the sentence: it says A jazz cellist and composer known for her unique
sounds and blend of musical traditions and then gives a person’s name. This
is a describing phrase beginning with “A.” According to the rule, these
phrases should always get commas around them, as they are Extra
Information. Eliminate (B), (C), and (D) as they don’t have a comma after the
phrase. The correct answer is (A).
If you feel a little iffy about this Extra versus Specifying Information idea,
it’s worth keeping in mind that while there are gray areas with this rule, those
ambiguities aren’t tested on the Digital SAT. On the test, it should be obvious
whether the information is Extra or not if they give you the option of no
punctuation versus matching punctuation before and after.


                          Extra Information Rules

          1. Extra Information can come before or after the noun or
             pronoun it’s describing.
          2. Extra Information can be removed and produce a
             sentence with the same meaning, just a little less detail.
             It’s not needed for specifying which person or thing
             you’re talking about.
          3. Extra Information must always have commas, dashes, or
             parentheses both before and after the phrase.
          4. If you’re not sure whether the information is Extra or
             Specifying, try removing it from the sentence. If it is
             Extra, its removal will not affect your understanding of
             who or what the sentence is about.



SPECIFYING VS. EXTRA INFORMATION
DRILL
Determine whether each bolded phrase is Specifying or Extra Information. If
it is Specifying, put a checkmark because no punctuation is needed. If it is
Extra, add commas where they are needed. Answers are on this page.

   1. Composer and librettist Stephen Sondheim who studied with Oscar
      Hammerstein and Milton Babbitt was known for his creative
      wordplay and tightly constructed musical ideas.
  2. The person who composed Dies Irae is unknown.

  3. Intending to finish my homework before school I set my alarm earlier
     than usual.

  4. Intending to do well is not enough to succeed.

  5. Senegal a country in Africa is the westernmost country in Africa,
     Europe, or Asia.

  6. The tortoise that lives in our backyard hibernates during the winter.

  7. Some careers such as medicine and law require education beyond a
     bachelor’s degree.

  8. The chance for rain tomorrow according to the weather station is
     high.

  9. My favorite book kept away from me as punishment was returned by
     my parents.

 10. British engineer George Stephenson was known for his contributions
     to the improvement of railways.

A final topic that is occasionally tested on the Digital SAT is how to
properly construct the describing phrases we went over earlier. Here’s an
example.




  5.      Mark for Review
       Rachel Fuller Brown, a chemist, and Elizabeth Lee Hazen, a
       microbiologist, started working together to research fungi and bacteria.
       At the time, antibiotics would kill all bacteria, allowing fungus to grow
       out of control and cause diseases. Brown and Hazen began their project
     in 1948 and eventually created a drug called Nystatin, the first
     antifungal _______ cures fungal infections in humans.

     Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the conventions
     of Standard English?

        A antibiotic, that

        B antibiotic

        C antibiotic that

        D antibiotic,




                               Watch Us Crack It



Here’s How to Crack It
Start by looking at the question to determine that it’s in the Rules category.
Next, look at the answers to see what’s changing. In this case, it’s commas
and the word that. This is a good clue that the question is testing the
construction of describing phrases. Read from the beginning of the sentence:
Brown and Hazen began their project in 1948 and eventually created a
drug called Nystatin is already a complete sentence, also known as an
independent clause. Then it’s followed by a comma and a description of the
drug.

Start with the options that don’t contain that, (B) and (D). With (B), the
second part of the sentence would say the first antifungal antibiotic cures
fungal infections in humans. This is an independent clause, and it’s not
correct to link two independent clauses with only a comma (we’ll talk much
more about this in the next chapter). Thus, eliminate (B). Next, look at (D). In
this answer choice, the first antifungal antibiotic is Extra Information since
it’s separated with commas. So, if this is Extra, try reading the sentence
without the phrase. It reads…eventually created a drug called Nystatin
cures fungal infections in humans. The verb cures does not have a subject
here—if it’s referring to Nystatin, there would need to be a word such as
which to refer back to Nystatin. This isn’t a complete sentence with the extra
verb, so eliminate (D).

Now that we recognize that that is needed, the hard part is finished. This is
because we know that phrases beginning with that are always Specifying and
don’t get commas. So, eliminate (A). The correct answer is (C). This
correctly completes the describing phrase.




SPECIFYING VS. EXTRA INFORMATION
DRILL ANSWERS
  1. Extra—put commas before and after the bolded phrase
  2. Specifying—correct as written
  3. Extra—put a comma after the bolded phrase
  4. Specifying—correct as written
  5. Extra—put commas before and after the bolded phrase
  6. Specifying—correct as written
  7. Extra—put commas before and after the bolded phrase
  8. Extra—put commas before and after the bolded phrase
  9. Extra—put commas before and after the bolded phrase
 10. Specifying—correct as written
Describing Phrases Drill
Answers can be found starting on this page.

Time: 7 minutes

  1.      Mark for Review
       In 1965, farm workers participated in a labor strike against grape
       growers to protest exploitation of farm workers. The five-year strike
       was the first time many common strike tactics were used—boycotts,
       community organization, nonviolent resistance, and _______ and
       ultimately resulted in a victory for the farm workers.

       Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the conventions
       of Standard English?

         A marches

         B marches—

         C marches;

         D marches,


  2.      Mark for Review
       Israeli poet and _______ has used his studies of ancient religions in his
       works The Song of Tahira, an epic about a fictional society’s religion
       and customs, and The Kingdom, a novel about the life of King David.

       Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the conventions
       of Standard English?

         A novelist, Amir Or
       B novelist Amir Or

       C novelist, Amir Or,

       D novelist Amir Or,


3.      Mark for Review
     Ultrasound technology utilizes a form of sound waves and is used in
     medicine to generate images of areas of the human body. John J.
     _______ as the father of medical ultrasound, helped develop the
     technology with a focus on imaging cancerous cells.

     Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the conventions
     of Standard English?

       A Wild, known

       B Wild known

       C Wild—known

       D Wild (known


4.      Mark for Review
     By activating multiple pathways in the brain at once, scientists hope to
     treat neurological disorders. For example, _______ may be able to be
     treated by simultaneously stimulating brain cells devoted to hearing and
     brain cells devoted to pain.

     Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the conventions
     of Standard English?

       A tinnitus, or ringing in the ears
       B tinnitus, or ringing in the ears,

       C tinnitus or ringing in the ears,

       D tinnitus or ringing in the ears


5.      Mark for Review
     Gronk, born Glugio Nicandro, is a Chicano _______ shows his work
     not only in galleries but also in public spaces, going so far as to
     distribute flyers featuring his work at bus stops.

     Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the conventions
     of Standard English?

       A artist,

       B artist

       C artist, which

       D artist who


6.      Mark for Review
     Maki Kawai is a chemist from Japan who invented spatially selective
     single-molecule spectroscopy. She combined two forms of
     spectroscopy into this new _______ led to the detection of a novel
     reaction pathway on the superficial level of titanium dioxide.

     Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the conventions
     of Standard English?

       A method

       B method, which
         C method, that

         D method,


DESCRIBING PHRASES DRILL ANSWERS
AND EXPLANATIONS
1.   B

     In this Rules question, punctuation is changing in the answer choices.
     The first part of the sentence says The five-year strike was the first
     time many common strike tactics were used—boycotts, community
     organization, nonviolent resistance, and marches, which contains a
     dash. A pair of dashes can be used to indicate Extra Information. If the
     phrase boycotts, community organization, nonviolent resistance, and
     marches is Extra Information, it does need dashes before and after the
     phrase. To test, try removing the phrase from the sentence. Then it reads
     The five-year strike was the first time many common strike tactics
     were used and ultimately resulted in a victory for the farm workers.
     This is perfectly fine, so the phrase is Extra Information and thus needs
     matching punctuation before and after. Eliminate answers that do not
     have a dash.

           (A) is wrong because it doesn’t have punctuation after the Extra
           Information.

           (B) is correct because it has a dash after the Extra Information,
           which matches the dash before the Extra Information.

           (C) and (D) are wrong because they don’t use a dash after the
           Extra Information.

2.   B
     In this Rules question, punctuation is changing in the answer choices.
     The first part of the sentence says Israeli poet and novelist Amir Or.
     The word novelist is a title for Amir Or, so no punctuation should be
     used between novelist and Amir Or. The verb (has used) comes right
     after this. A single punctuation mark can’t separate a subject and a
     verb. Eliminate answers that use punctuation.

          (A) and (C) are wrong because there should be no punctuation
          between novelist and Amir, since it’s a title.

          (B) is correct because no punctuation should be used here.

          (D) is wrong because a single punctuation mark can’t come
          between a subject and a verb.

3.   A

     In this Rules question, punctuation is changing in the answer choices.
     The first part of the sentence says John J. Wild, which is the subject.
     The phrase after the subject, known as the father of medical
     ultrasound, ends with a comma, which indicates it may be Extra
     Information. To test, try removing the phrase from the sentence. Then it
     reads John J. Wild helped develop the technology with a focus on
     imaging cancerous cells. This is perfectly fine, so the phrase is Extra
     Information and thus needs matching punctuation before and after.
     Eliminate answers that do not have a comma.

          (A) is correct because it has a comma before the Extra
          Information.

          (B), (C), and (D) are wrong because they don’t separate the Extra
          Information with a comma before the phrase to match the one after.

4.   B
     In this Rules question, punctuation is changing in the answer choices.
     The first part of the sentence says For example, tinnitus. In the answer
     choices, commas appear around the phrase or ringing in the ears,
     indicating that it may be Extra Information. To test, try removing the
     phrase from the sentence. Then it reads For example, tinnitus may be
     able to be treated by simultaneously stimulating brain cells devoted
     to hearing and brain cells devoted to pain. This is perfectly fine, so
     the phrase is Extra Information and thus needs matching punctuation
     before and after. Eliminate answers that do not have commas before
     and after the Extra Information.

          (A) and (C) are wrong because they only have one comma, not a
          pair, around the Extra Information.

          (B) is correct because it has commas before and after the Extra
          Information.

          (D) is wrong because it doesn’t separate the Extra Information
          with two commas.

5.   D

     In this Rules question, commas and the words which and who are
     changing in the answers, which suggests that the question is testing the
     construction of describing phrases. The first part of the sentence says
     Gronk, born Glugio Nicandro, is a Chicano artist, which is an
     independent clause. The second part of the sentence says shows his
     work not only in galleries but also in public spaces, going so far as
     to distribute flyers featuring his work at bus stops, which is a
     describing phrase and needs to be properly constructed. Eliminate any
     answer that doesn’t properly construct the describing phrase.

          (A) and (B) are wrong because the describing phrase needs a
          subject for the verb shows.
          (C) is wrong because which cannot be used with people.

          (D) is correct because who is used with people and is the subject
          of the verb shows.

6.   B

     In this Rules question, commas and the words which and that are
     changing in the answers, which suggests that the question is testing the
     construction of describing phrases. The first part of the sentence says
     She combined two forms of spectroscopy into this new method, which
     is an independent clause. The second part of the sentence says led to
     the detection of a novel reaction pathway on the superficial level of
     titanium dioxide. The second part of the sentence is a describing
     phrase and needs to be properly constructed. Eliminate any answer that
     doesn’t properly construct the describing phrase.

          (A) and (D) are wrong because led is missing a subject.

          (B) is correct because which is the subject of led and properly
          constructs a describing phrase.

          (C) is wrong because a phrase starting with “that” is Specifying
          and never follows a comma.
Summary
 Specifying Information is needed in order to tell which person or thing
 the sentence is discussing.

 Specifying Information should never be separated from the rest of the
 sentence with punctuation. If it were removed, the meaning of the
 sentence would change and become unclear or nonsensical.

 Extra Information can be removed from the sentence without affecting the
 sentence’s meaning.

 Extra Information must be separated from the sentence with commas,
 dashes, or parentheses both before and after, unless it appears at the
 beginning or end of the sentence.

 If you’re not sure whether something is Specifying or Extra Information,
 try removing it from the sentence to see whether the meaning is affected.

 Use clues in the part of the sentence before and/or after the blank. If the
 phrase already has or does not have punctuation before or after it, then
 the blank simply needs to match.
Chapter 14
Rules Questions: Linking
Independent Clauses
Now that you have learned how to construct a complete sentence, the next
step is to see how two complete sentences, also known as independent
clauses, can be combined. You’ll also learn the various ways that they should
never be combined so that you can eliminate the answers that make those
mistakes.
THE STRONGEST LINK
We’ve seen how a complete sentence is constructed. Of course, it’s also
possible to put two complete sentences together—in this case, we’ll refer to
the individual sentences as independent clauses. An independent clause is
something that could stand alone as a sentence—that’s why it’s called
independent! Next, we’re going to look at how to put two independent
clauses together in the same sentence. Let’s take a look at a few different
types of punctuation marks and how they are used.

Semicolons
A semicolon is a punctuation mark that functions like a period; it is used
between two ideas that could be their own separate sentences. See how we
did that? Anytime you see a semicolon in the answer choices, look to see
whether you have two independent clauses, or ask yourself whether a period
could be used there. If a period can be used, then a semicolon can be used.
(There is an exception to this rule that involves lists, which will be covered
in the next chapter.)

Commas
A comma can never link two independent clauses. A sentence that does this
creates an error called a comma splice or a run-on sentence. A comma can
be used with two independent clauses if there is a coordinating conjunction,
also known as FANBOYS: For, And, Nor, But, Or, Yet, So. Earlier, we saw
examples similar to this:

      He brushed his teeth and went to bed.        ✓

This sentence has a single subject and two verbs that go along with the one
subject. What if we add a subject for the second verb? Then we’d have two
independent clauses, and we’d need to put a comma before the coordinating
conjunction. Here’s how that looks:

      He brushed his teeth, and he went to bed.        ✓
Both of these sentences are perfectly fine. It simply depends on what you
wish to write. When it comes to the Digital SAT, you’ll need to know this
rule:


        You must put a comma before a coordinating conjunction
        (FANBOYS) if there are independent clauses both before and
        after the conjunction.


Here are some examples of incorrect ways to write this sentence, at least
when it comes to the Digital SAT.

      He brushed his teeth, he went to bed.         x

      He brushed his teeth and he went to bed.          x

These sentences might seem okay for casual writing, but when it comes to the
rules that are tested on the Digital SAT, it’s very important to remember that a
comma by itself can never come in between two independent clauses, nor can
the FANBOYS word on its own.

Colons and Dashes
Using a colon is a great way to make writing more concise. Here’s an
example:

      For the test, we need to bring three items, which are a pencil,
      a calculator, and a ruler.    ✓

      For the test, we need to bring three items: a pencil, a
      calculator, and a ruler.    ✓

A colon tells you that what comes after is going to elaborate on or explain
what came before. In this case, it tells us that the three items are going to
follow the colon. Here, we used a list after the colon, which you may be
comfortable with. But colons can come before an explanation or a definition
as well. Here’s an example:

      English punctuation is not always easy: there are often several
      possible ways to punctuate a sentence.     ✓

In this case, the part after the colon is another independent clause, and it
explains the first part—why punctuation is not always easy. You might be
thinking that you would punctuate this sentence differently. If so, that’s
perfectly fine. Here are a few other ways this could be written:

      English punctuation is not always easy. There are often several
      possible ways to punctuate a sentence.     ✓

      English punctuation is not always easy; there are often several
      possible ways to punctuate a sentence.     ✓

      English punctuation is not always easy—there are often
      several possible ways to punctuate a sentence.    ✓

      English punctuation is not always easy, for there are often
      several possible ways to punctuate a sentence.      ✓

      English punctuation is not always easy because there are often
      several possible ways to punctuate a sentence.    ✓

Since we have two independent clauses, we could use either a semicolon or
a period—remember that they are interchangeable in this context. We can
also use a dash, which suggests the same thing a colon does and can be used
the same way. It’s also possible to add a coordinating conjunction (in this
case, we used for) with a comma, since we have two independent clauses.
Lastly, you could add a subordinating conjunction such as because to
connect the ideas, which we will talk more about in the next chapter. It’s
important to keep in mind that College Board will never give you more than
one answer that could be correct. You won’t be asked to choose between two
punctuation marks that both work in a given context.

It’s worth noting that there is an incorrect way students might like to write
sentences using colons. Here’s an example:

      My favorite colors are: silver, pink, and yellow.         x

Here’s how that should be written:

      My favorite colors are silver, pink, and yellow.          ✓

There’s no need for a colon here. As we saw above, the part after the colon
does not have to be an independent clause. However, when it comes to the
Digital SAT, the part before the colon does need to be an independent clause.
Therefore, another way to write that example is as follows:

      I have three favorite colors: silver, pink, and yellow.       ✓


         A colon or a single dash can only come after an independent
                                   clause.


Let’s put all of those rules together.

Two independent clauses can be joined with…
   A semicolon, anytime (;)
   A comma plus an appropriate coordinating conjunction (FANBOYS)
   A colon or a dash, if the second part of the sentence explains the first in
   some way (: or —)

Two independent clauses can NEVER be joined with…
   A comma without a coordinating conjunction
       A coordinating conjunction without a comma
       No punctuation to separate the independent clauses

Now that we have seen the different ways to connect independent clauses,
let’s try a few Digital SAT-style questions to put it all together.




  1.      Mark for Review
       American folk musician Mike Seeger came from a family of _______
       parents, Ruth Crawford Seeger and Charles Louis Seeger, Jr., were
       composers and ethnomusicologists, and his half-brother Pete Seeger
       was also a folk singer.

       Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the conventions
       of Standard English?

          A musicians, his

          B musicians, his,

          C musicians his

          D musicians; his


Here’s How to Crack It
Start by looking at the question to identify the question type: Rules. Next,
look at the answer to see what’s changing and determine what the question is
testing. The punctuation after musicians is changing, so look for independent
clauses. Start at the beginning of the sentence: American folk musician Mike
Seeger came from a family of musicians. That’s an independent clause. Take
a look at the rest of the text, including the first word in the answer choices:
His parents, Ruth Crawford Seeger and Charles Louis Seeger, Jr., were
composers and ethnomusicologists, and his half-brother Pete Seeger was
also a folk singer. This is also an independent clause, so eliminate any
answers that contain punctuation that creates a run-on sentence.

Eliminate (A), (B), and (C) because a comma without a coordinating
conjunction and no punctuation at all are not correct ways to combine two
independent clauses; they each create a run-on sentence. Choice (D) has a
semicolon, which is an appropriate way to link two independent clauses. The
correct answer is (D).




  2.      Mark for Review
       Physicist Edward Witten is known for his rigorous use of mathematics
       in his research. He was the first physicist to earn the Fields Medal from
       the International Mathematical Union. Witten earned his professional
       reputation as a _______ he was originally interested in politics,
       publishing articles in The New Republic and The Nation and working
       on George McGovern’s presidential campaign.

       Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the conventions
       of Standard English?

         A scientist, but

         B scientist,

         C scientist but

         D scientist


Here’s How to Crack It
Look at the question to see that this is in the Rules category, so check what’s
changing in the answers: commas with a coordinating conjunction. Look for
independent clauses. The first part of the sentence says Witten earned his
professional reputation as a scientist. That’s an independent clause. Read
the rest of the sentence as it is: he was originally interested in politics,
publishing articles in The New Republic and The Nation and working on
George McGovern’s presidential campaign. This is also an independent
clause. We know that a comma by itself or no punctuation at all can never go
in between two independent clauses; that would create a run-on sentence.
Eliminate (B) and (D).

Since there are two independent clauses, you can connect them with a
coordinating conjunction if you use a comma as well. That knowledge allows
you to eliminate (C), which has the coordinating conjunction but not the
comma, which isn’t okay when you have two independent clauses. The
correct answer is (A).




  3.      Mark for Review
       Fordlandia is a district located in Brazil on the Tapajós river that was
       founded in 1928 to serve as a hub of _______ the goal was for the
       10,000 inhabitants to generate rubber for the Ford Motor Company to
       use when making automobiles.

       Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the conventions
       of Standard English?

          A industry while

          B industry
        C industry,

        D industry:


Here’s How to Crack It
Identify that this is a Rules question, and then go to the answers to see that
it’s testing punctuation. Read from the beginning of the sentence and look for
independent clauses. The first part says Fordlandia is a district located in
Brazil on the Tapajós river that was founded in 1928 to serve as a hub of
industry, which is an independent clause. Read the second part of the
sentence without the word while in (A): the goal was for the 10,000
inhabitants to generate rubber for the Ford Motor Company to use when
making automobiles. This is also an independent clause, so eliminate (B)
and (C) because two independent clauses must be separated by some
punctuation other than a comma alone.

Keep (D) because a colon can come after an independent clause if the second
part of the sentence elaborates on the first. In this case, the second
independent clause explains how the district would be a hub of industry, so
the colon is appropriate. Consider (A) next. The word while isn’t the
appropriate connector in this case; while is used either to show a contrast,
which isn’t appropriate here, or to express two events happening at the same
time, which also isn’t the link between the clauses. Eliminate (A). The
correct answer is (D).




PICKING SIDES WITH TRANSITIONS
A final, trickier way that College Board likes to test you on connecting
independent clauses is to make you determine where the punctuation goes
based on which part of the sentence gets a transition, which is a word or
phrase such as however, for example, or in addition that shows the reader
what direction the ideas are going to move in. Take a look at the next
example.




  4.      Mark for Review
       Researchers at the University of Edinburgh have discovered a link
       between learning a musical instrument as a child and improved
       cognitive skills later in _______ emeritus Ian Deary warns that this
       effect was small and that it is difficult to prove that learning an
       instrument causes greater mental abilities.

       Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the conventions
       of Standard English?

         A life. However, professor

         B life, however. Professor

         C life, however, professor

         D life, however: professor


Here’s How to Crack It
Use the question to identify the category, Rules, and then the answers to
determine the topic, punctuation. Notice that two options have periods—(A)
and (B)—but one has the period before the transition (however), and one has
the period after. This means that in addition to punctuation, you’re being
tested on whether the transition belongs with the first or the second part of
the sentence. Start by reading the first part, which says Researchers at the
University of Edinburgh have discovered a link between learning a musical
instrument as a child and improved cognitive skills later in life. This is an
independent clause, but is it contrasting with something that came before?
No, because there is nothing before. Thus, however, shouldn’t go with the
first part of the sentence, and (B), (C), and (D) can be eliminated.

To confirm, read the second part of the sentence: professor emeritus Ian
Deary warns that this effect was small and that it is difficult to prove that
learning an instrument causes greater mental abilities. This is also an
independent clause, and it does provide a contrast—the first clause says
there is a link between two things, but the second part warns that the effect
was small and difficult to prove. Thus, it is appropriate for the contrast word
to be in the second idea. The correct answer is (A).



As you saw in the last example, it’s important to keep an eye out for
questions in which the transition can go with one part of the sentence or the
other. When you see this being tested, you will need to look back at the
previous sentence, if there is one.
Linking Independent Clauses Drill
Answers can be found starting on this page.

Time: 10 minutes

  1.      Mark for Review
       José Barreiro is a Cuban-American novelist who serves as an advocate
       for Indigenous culture and history for native communities in Guatemala,
       Cuba, and _______ Barreiro works with the Smithsonian Institution to
       ensure that the communities are recognized respectfully and accurately.

       Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the conventions
       of Standard English?

         A Peru

         B Peru,

         C Peru and

         D Peru.


  2.      Mark for Review
       There are many proteins that control the cell cycle and when cells grow
       and divide. Sir Paul Maxime Nurse discovered one of these proteins in
       yeast _______ he was awarded the Nobel Prize in Physiology or
       Medicine alongside Leland Hartwell and Tim Hunt for identifying a
       similar protein in human cells.

       Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the conventions
       of Standard English?
       A cells and

       B cells, and

       C cells

       D cells,


3.      Mark for Review
     Since many of his works are sardonic, some of Chinese author Yan
     Lianke’s stories have been viewed as controversial. Many of his works
     question reality and utilize twisted and complex _______ these
     personas often display apprehension and concern about the living
     conditions in China.

     Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the conventions
     of Standard English?

       A characters and

       B characters

       C characters;

       D characters,


4.      Mark for Review
     Jenny Tung is an evolutionary anthropologist who studies the
     connections between genomics, health, and social experiences in
     different populations of primates and monkeys. While studying a
     population of Kenyan baboons, she found several factors that led to
     significantly shorter life _______ environmental conditions, such as
     droughts, isolation from other baboons, and lower social status within
     the community.

     Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the conventions
     of Standard English?

       A spans:

       B spans

       C spans;

       D spans,


5.      Mark for Review
     In 1984, Romanian poet and politician Ana Blandiana wrote her first
     protest poem against her country’s communist _______ “Totul,” which
     contrasted the government’s official statements about life in Romania
     with her and others’ lived experiences.

     Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the conventions
     of Standard English?

       A government:

       B government;

       C government

       D government.


6.      Mark for Review
     The oldest known surviving film is Roundhay Garden Scene, a short
     silent piece filmed by a French artist. The film has been preserved in
     multiple _______ it was copied onto glass plates from the original
     negative, and it was printed on 35 mm film.

     Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the conventions
     of Standard English?

       A forms

       B forms:

       C forms, for example

       D forms,


7.      Mark for Review
     Scientist Margaret S. Collins was the first African American female
     entomologist and was known as the “Termite Lady.” Starting in the
     1970s, she began researching termites for the Smithsonian’s National
     Museum of Natural _______ in 1989, she discovered a new species of
     termite called Neotermes luykxi with her colleague David Nickle.

     Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the conventions
     of Standard English?

       A History, then,

       B History,

       C History;

       D History then,


8.      Mark for Review
     In languages, classifiers are used to describe a noun, such as how
     “cups” describes “coffee” in the phrase “three cups of coffee.” Unlike
     English, which only sometimes uses classifiers, Chinese languages use
     classifiers very frequently. Often, the specific classifier used is based
     on some quality of the _______ objects such as tables and paper use
     “zhāng,” whereas long, thin objects such as sticks and pens use “tiáo.”

     Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the conventions
     of Standard English?

         A noun, for example, flat

         B noun, for example. Flat

         C noun. For example, flat

         D noun for example flat


LINKING INDEPENDENT CLAUSES DRILL
ANSWERS AND EXPLANATIONS
1.   D

     In this Rules question, punctuation is changing in the answer choices.
     The first part of the sentence says José Barreiro is a Cuban-American
     novelist who serves as an advocate for Indigenous culture and
     history for native communities in Guatemala, Cuba, and Peru, which
     is an independent clause. The second part says Barreiro works with the
     Smithsonian Institution to ensure that the communities are
     recognized respectfully and accurately, which is also an independent
     clause. Eliminate any answer that can’t correctly connect two
     independent clauses.

           (A) is wrong because it creates a run-on sentence.
          (B) and (C) are wrong because neither a comma alone nor a
          coordinating conjunction (FANBOYS) alone can connect two
          independent clauses.

          (D) is correct because two independent clauses can be two
          separate sentences.

2.   B

     In this Rules question, punctuation is changing in the answer choices.
     The first part of the sentence says Sir Paul Maxime Nurse discovered
     one of these proteins in yeast cells, which is an independent clause.
     The second part says he was awarded the Nobel Prize in Physiology
     or Medicine alongside Leland Hartwell and Tim Hunt for identifying
     a similar protein in human cells, which is also an independent clause.
     Eliminate any answer that can’t correctly connect two independent
     clauses.

          (A) and (D) are wrong because neither a comma alone nor a
          coordinating conjunction (FANBOYS) alone can connect two
          independent clauses.

          (B) is correct because a comma + a coordinating conjunction
          (FANBOYS) can connect two independent clauses.

          (C) is wrong because it creates a run-on sentence.

3.   C

     In this Rules question, punctuation is changing in the answer choices.
     The first part of the sentence says Many of his works question reality
     and utilize twisted and complex characters, which is an independent
     clause. The second part says these personas often display
     apprehension and concern about the living conditions in China,
     which is also an independent clause. Eliminate any answer that can’t
     correctly connect two independent clauses.

          (A) and (D) are wrong because neither a comma alone nor a
          coordinating conjunction (FANBOYS) alone can connect two
          independent clauses.

          (B) is wrong because it creates a run-on sentence.

          (C) is correct because a semicolon can connect two independent
          clauses.

4.   A

     In this Rules question, punctuation is changing in the answer choices.
     Look for independent clauses. The first part of the sentence says While
     studying a population of Kenyan baboons, she found several factors
     that led to significantly shorter life spans, which is an independent
     clause. The second part of the sentence says environmental conditions,
     such as droughts, isolation from other baboons, and lower social
     status within the community, which is a list of the factors. Eliminate
     any option that doesn’t correctly connect an independent clause with a
     list.

          (A) is correct because a colon is appropriate to connect an
          independent clause and a list.

          (B) and (D) are wrong because they don’t make it clear that the
          second part lists the factors.

          (C) is wrong because a semicolon can only link two independent
          clauses.

5.   A
     In this Rules question, punctuation is changing in the answer choices.
     Look for independent clauses. The first part of the sentence says In
     1984, Romanian poet and politician Ana Blandiana wrote her first
     protest poem against her country’s communist government, which is
     an independent clause. The second part of the sentence says “Totul,”
     which contrasted the government’s official statements about life in
     Romania with her and others’ lived experiences, which is not an
     independent clause and tells what the poem was. Eliminate any option
     that doesn’t correctly connect the independent clause with the
     explanation of the poem.

          (A) is correct because a colon is used when the first part is an
          independent clause and the second provides an explanation or
          definition.

          (B) is wrong because a semicolon can only link two independent
          clauses.

          (C) is wrong because the lack of punctuation doesn’t make it clear
          that the second part gives the name and description of the poem.

          (D) is wrong because the second part isn’t an independent clause
          and can’t stand on its own.

6.   B

     In this Rules question, punctuation is changing in the answer choices.
     Look for independent clauses. The first part of the sentence says The
     film has been preserved in multiple forms, which is an independent
     clause. The second part of the sentence says it was copied onto glass
     plates from the original negative, and it was printed on 35 mm film,
     which is also an independent clause. Eliminate any answer that can’t
     correctly connect two independent clauses.
          (A) is wrong because it creates a run-on sentence.

          (B) is correct because a colon can connect two independent
          clauses, and the second part explains the first.

          (C) and (D) are wrong because a comma without a coordinating
          conjunction (FANBOYS) can’t connect two independent clauses.

7.   C

     In this Rules question, punctuation is changing in the answer choices.
     Look for independent clauses. The first part of the sentence says
     Starting in the 1970s, she began researching termites for the
     Smithsonian’s National Museum of Natural History, which is an
     independent clause. The second part says in 1989, she discovered a
     new species of termite called Neotermes luykxi with her colleague
     David Nickle, which is also an independent clause. Some of the
     answers include then with the second part of the sentence, which does
     not change whether or not the second part is an independent clause.
     Eliminate any answer that can’t correctly connect two independent
     clauses.

          (A), (B), and (D) are wrong because a comma without a
          coordinating conjunction (FANBOYS) can’t connect two
          independent clauses.

          (C) is correct because a semicolon can connect two independent
          clauses.

8.   C

     In this Rules question, punctuation with a transition is changing in the
     answer choices. Look for independent clauses. The first part of the
     sentence says Often, the specific classifier used is based on some
     quality of the noun. There is an option to add for example to this
independent clause, but it’s not an example of something. Eliminate
options with for example in the first part.

     (A) and (D) are wrong because the clauses before and after for
     example are independent and can’t be linked without punctuation
     or with a comma alone.

     (B) is wrong because it puts for example with the first
     independent clause.

     (C) is correct because for example is part of the second
     independent clause.
Summary
 An independent clause can stand on its own as a complete sentence.

 Two independent clauses can be put together in the same sentence using
 a semicolon.

 Two independent clauses can also be connected with a comma + an
 appropriate coordinating conjunction (FANBOYS—For, And, Nor, But,
 Or, Yet, So).

 A colon or a dash can be used when the second part of the sentence
 elaborates on the first. In this case, the first part of the sentence must be
 an independent clause, but the second part doesn’t have to be.

 Two independent clauses can never be connected with a comma alone, a
 coordinating conjunction alone, or no punctuation at all.

 When transitions and punctuation are changing, determine whether the
 transition belongs with the first or the second part of the sentence.
Chapter 15
Rules Questions: Dependent Clauses,
Lists, and No Punctuation
There are a few more punctuation-related topics that you are likely to see on
the Digital SAT. In this chapter, you’ll learn about dependent clauses and
how to connect them to independent clauses, how to answer questions that
involve complicated lists, and when no punctuation is needed at all.
EVERY [DEPENDENT CLAUSE] NEEDS A
FRIEND
You already know that an independent clause can stand on its own to be a
sentence. Thus, a dependent clause can’t be its own sentence. It “depends”
on an independent clause to make a complete sentence. We’ve already seen
examples involving the Independent Clause + Independent Clause
combination and the different ways they can be joined. In this chapter, we’ll
see how a dependent clause can be joined with an independent clause. But
first, let’s recognize what a dependent clause looks like.

Knowing that an independent clause requires a subject and a verb, you might
think that a dependent clause doesn’t have one of these things. But actually, a
dependent clause still has a subject and a verb. What usually makes a clause
dependent is that it starts with a subordinating word (or phrase). Let’s break
down that term: sub- means “below,” right? So, a subordinating word moves
a clause to a lower level: in other words, it takes a clause from being
independent to being dependent. Let’s see some examples.

      Independent: they wanted to watch a movie

      Dependent: because they wanted to watch a movie

      Dependent: since they wanted to watch a movie

      Dependent: that they wanted to watch a movie

      Dependent: if they wanted to watch a movie

      Dependent: though they wanted to watch a movie

      Dependent: when they wanted to watch a movie

Try the following drill to practice identifying independent and dependent
clauses.
INDEPENDENT VS. DEPENDENT CLAUSES
DRILL
Circle whether each clause is independent or dependent. Answers are on this
page.

   1. they sang
      Independent / Dependent

   2. until he pays her back for lunch
      Independent / Dependent

   3. where I put my socks
      Independent / Dependent

   4. as soon as I was elected captain of my team
      Independent / Dependent

   5. singing my friends’ favorite songs is one of my favorite activities
      Independent / Dependent

   6. snow fell overnight in my neighborhood
      Independent / Dependent

   7. that you will be supporting me
      Independent / Dependent

   8. if she walks
      Independent / Dependent

   9. they will wash the dishes and take out the garbage
      Independent / Dependent

 10. if I decided to have dinner and play games with my roommate
     Independent / Dependent
There are two ways to connect an independent clause and a dependent
clause: Independent + Dependent or Dependent + Independent. In either case,
the only punctuation that is allowed is a comma. Usually the Independent +
Dependent combination will not have a comma, but the Dependent +
Independent one will, though this is not a strict rule. Let’s take a look at some
correctly punctuated examples.

      Because it was raining, I brought my umbrella.             ✓

      I brought my umbrella because it was raining.              ✓

      Even though the weather was cold, I didn’t wear my heavy
      jacket.   ✓

      I didn’t wear my heavy jacket even though the weather was
      cold.     ✓

      If you ’re ready, we can leave the house now.          ✓

      We can leave the house now if you ’re ready.          ✓

      While dogs need care more frequently, cats can be left alone
      for several days.  ✓

      Cats can be left alone for several days, while dogs need care
      more frequently.     ✓

From the last example, you can see that a comma can sometimes be used
when the dependent clause comes second. This would typically happen when
there is a contrast or when the author wants to put a greater pause or
separation between the ideas. That being said, remember that College Board
won’t test you on anything that is a gray area. Chances are, if you were to see
a sentence like the last one above, there wouldn’t be an option without a
comma before while, since both ways could be acceptable.
Let’s see a couple of examples of how this topic can be tested.




  1.      Mark for Review
       There were two volcanic eruptions that occurred in the U.S. during the
       20th century. Lassen Peak erupted in 1915 and destroyed an area to the
       northeast of the ________ the eruption of Mount St. Helens in 1980
       was a much more devastating event.

       Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the conventions
       of Standard English?

         A peak. Though

         B peak: though

         C peak, though

         D peak; though

                  Remember, a period and a semicolon function the
                  same way. Chances are, if you see both of them in
                  the answer choices with no changes in wording,
                  both answers are wrong.



Here’s How to Crack It
Use the question to identify the category, which is Rules. Then, look at the
answer choices to see what’s changing: punctuation. Start from the beginning
of the sentence: Lassen Peak erupted in 1915 and destroyed an area to the
northeast of the peak. That’s an independent clause. The second part of the
sentence reads though the eruption of Mount St. Helens in 1980 was a
much more devastating event. This is a dependent clause since it begins
with the subordinating word though. We know that the independent +
dependent combination can only be connected with either a comma or no
punctuation at all, so eliminate (A), (B), and (D). The correct answer is (C).




  2.      Mark for Review
       Known for his headless, life-size sculptural figures, British-Nigerian
       artist Yinka Shonibare often uses so-called “African” fabric in his
       work. He has stated that he actually likes that this material is not
       authentically ________ it symbolizes how culture is artificially
       constructed.

       Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the conventions
       of Standard English?

         A African because

         B African; because

         C African: because

         D African. Because


Here’s How to Crack It
Look at the question to determine that this is a Rules question. Next, look at
the answers to see that punctuation is changing. Start from the beginning of
the sentence: He has stated that he actually likes that this material is not
authentically African is an independent clause. The second part, because it
symbolizes how culture is artificially constructed, is a dependent clause
since it starts with the subordinating conjunction because. The independent +
dependent combination can only be connected with either a comma or no
punctuation at all, so eliminate (B), (C), and (D). The correct answer is (A).
An independent clause and a dependent clause (in either order) can be
joined with…
    A comma (,)
    No punctuation at all

An independent clause and a dependent clause (in either order) can
NEVER be joined with…
    A period (.)
    A semicolon (;)
    A colon (:)
    A coordinating conjunction (FANBOYS)
    A dash, unless the dependent clause is Extra Info (—)


ADD IT TO YOUR LIST—PUNCTUATION,
THAT IS
As you probably remember from school, anytime you write a sentence that
has a list of three or more things, you must put commas in between the items.
Let’s see some examples:

      Do you prefer pumpkin pie, pecan pie, or apple pie?        ✓

      The professor’s day consisted of teaching classes to
      undergraduate students, meeting with graduate student
      mentees, and editing an article for publication in a research
      journal.     ✓

When it comes to the Digital SAT, and most of the time in real life, a list
should always have and or or before the final item in the list. Many
publications, such as newspapers, don’t bother putting a comma before the
and or or in order to save space (much like how newspaper headlines leave
out some words), although many style guides call for this comma to always
be used. Since this is a disputed rule in punctuation, it isn’t tested on the
Digital SAT. The Digital SAT will put a comma before the and or or in the
correct answer, but you won’t be given an option without that comma that
doesn’t make some other mistake.

Let’s see an example of how this could be tested.




   3.      Mark for Review
        L. Frank is an activist for Indigenous languages and art. One of her
        primary publications included a book called First Families:
        Photographic History of California Indians, which featured pictures
        of a traditional canoe being ________ and an expedition being
        completed along the coast of California.

        Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the conventions
        of Standard English?

          A sailed a man performing a traditional funerary dance

          B sailed, a man performing a traditional funerary dance,

          C sailed a man performing a traditional funerary dance,

          D sailed, a man, performing a traditional funerary dance


Here’s How to Crack It
Start by using the question to identify that this falls into the Rules category.
Then, look to see what’s changing in the answers: commas. Read the sentence
to determine how commas are being tested. The sentence explains what the
book featured and contains the word and towards the end, so look for a list.
In a list, all of the items must be in the same form. The first item after
pictures is a traditional canoe, and the last item after and is an expedition,
both of which are nouns, so the second item should start with a noun. The
second and third words, a man, represent a noun, so try putting the comma
before that to form the list. In this case, the list would consist of 1) a
traditional canoe being sailed, 2) a man performing a traditional funerary
dance, and 3) an expedition being completed along the coast of California.
This makes sense because those are all in the same form and all are things
that could be pictures.

Now that we’ve established that this question has a list of three or more
things, we can use the rule that such a list must have commas in between.
Eliminate (A) and (C) because they don’t have a comma after sailed.
Eliminate (D) because there is no reason to put a comma after man. The
correct answer is (B).



The key is to notice when the sentence contains a list. In the example above,
the word and appears in the original sentence, and the answer choices
include some words that together aren’t logical: sailed a man. This suggests
that there is some need for punctuation, which can help you realize that the
sentence contains a list.

There is also a more complicated, more unusual way that the Digital SAT
may construct lists in a text. Take a look at the following example.

      The committee members are Alex, a parent, Taylor, a teacher,
      and Ali, a community member.

Can you spot what’s a little confusing about that list? It’s unclear whether the
committee has three people on it (the ones with the names) or more people,
some of whose names aren’t given. In this case, the intention is to provide the
names and titles of the three committee members. We can make that clearer
by doing this:
       The committee members are Alex, a parent; Taylor, a teacher;
       and Ali, a community member.    ✓

In this case, semicolons are used to visually separate the items in the list so
that each item can have commas within it if needed. Earlier, we saw how
semicolons function just like periods. This example illustrates the one
exception: semicolons can separate a complicated list that includes commas
within one or more of the list items. If you see multiple semicolons in the
original sentence and the answers, that’s a good sign that the question is
testing this topic.

Let’s see an example.




  4.      Mark for Review
       Throat singing is a technique that uses a guttural (as opposed to the
       more common chest or head) voice and produces a sound that is often
       perceived as including multiple pitches from one person. Throat
       singing is a feature of many musical traditions, including Canto a
       ________ Buddhist chant, practiced in some monasteries in India and
       Tibet; and Inuit throat singing, used as a contest between two people in
       northern Canada.

       Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the conventions
       of Standard English?

         A tenóre; a style of quartet singing from Sardinia, Italy,

         B tenóre, a style of quartet singing from Sardinia, Italy,

         C tenóre, a style of quartet singing from Sardinia, Italy;

         D tenóre; a style of quartet singing from Sardinia, Italy;
Here’s How to Crack It
Start by looking at the question to determine that this is in the Rules category.
Then, look at the answer choices to see what’s changing, which reveals that
the question is testing commas and semicolons. Remember, there are two
uses for a semicolon. It can work like a period to connect two independent
clauses, or it can separate a complicated list that has commas within the
items. Read the sentence to see which of those it has. Notice that the sentence
already contains a semicolon near the end, but the part after the semicolon
(and Inuit throat singing, used as a contest between two people in northern
Canada) isn’t an independent clause. Since the only other use of a semicolon
is to connect independent clauses, this sentence must have a list separated
with semicolons.

Use the third example to determine the structure of each item: Musical
tradition, Comma, Use. Now, return to the first item in the list. After the
musical tradition Canto a tenóre, there should be a comma in order to follow
the pattern of the third item. Eliminate (A) and (D). The next place the
punctuation changes is after Italy. This is the end of the first item, as the next
thing is Buddhist chant, which is the second singing style. So, there must be
a semicolon after Italy to separate it from the next item in the list. Eliminate
(B). The correct answer is (C).




DON’T GO WHERE YOU’RE NOT WANTED—
IF YOU’RE PUNCTUATION
Now you have learned about all of the different types of punctuation and
when they should be used (besides apostrophes, which are coming up soon).
It’s equally important to know when they should not be used. You might think
that when College Board is asking you about punctuation, it’s because the
sentence needs some type of punctuation. However, sometimes the sentence
doesn’t need any punctuation at all. Let’s see an example.
       American physicist and educator Edward Alexander ________ the first
       African American to earn a Ph.D. in the United States, writing his
       dissertation in physics on the refractive indices of various glasses.

  5.      Mark for Review
       Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the conventions
       of Standard English?

         A Bouchet, was

         B Bouchet was

         C Bouchet: was

         D Bouchet. Was


Here’s How to Crack It
Identify the category, Rules, based on the question. Then, notice that
punctuation is changing in the answer choices. Start at the beginning of the
sentence: American physicist and educator Edward Alexander Bouchet.
This has given us the subject but not the verb. We can’t separate the subject
and verb with a single punctuation mark, since they are the most crucial
components of the sentence, so eliminate (A), (C), and (D). No punctuation
should be used, so the correct answer is (B).



We know that was pretty obvious since we basically implied that the correct
answer wouldn’t have punctuation. But let’s go over a few rules related to
this “no punctuation” topic.
                          “No Punctuation” Rules

         1. Don’t put punctuation where there is Specifying
            Information.
         2. Never put a single punctuation mark in between a subject
            and its verb.
         3. Don’t put punctuation after a preposition.

       Above all else, don’t use punctuation unless you have a
       reason to do so.


We’ve already discussed Rule #1 above, so let’s take a look at the second
rule.

      Astronaut Mae Jemison became interested in space in part
      because of Lieutenant Uhura, a Star Trek character.   ✓

      Mae Jemison , an astronaut, became interested in space in part
      because of Lieutenant Uhura, a Star Trek character.    ✓

Here are some of our sentences from earlier. The subject is Mae Jemison
and the verb is became. It is fine to put an Extra phrase in between the
subject and verb as long as it has matching punctuation on both sides, in this
case commas. However, what you can never do is put a single comma in
between the subject and the verb (the same is true for any other punctuation
mark). Here are some incorrect examples:

      Astronaut Mae Jemison , became interested in space in part
      because of Lieutenant Uhura, a Star Trek character.    x

      Astronaut Mae Jemison : became interested in space in part
      because of Lieutenant Uhura, a Star Trek character.   x
      Astronaut Mae Jemison —became interested in space in part
      because of Lieutenant Uhura, a Star Trek character. x

Sometimes there is more distance between the subject and the verb. Still,
make sure there isn’t a single punctuation mark between them. Here is
another incorrect example:

      The sandwich I wanted to order, was no longer available.
      x

The subject is sandwich and the verb is was. This example puts a single
comma in between, so it’s wrong. No punctuation should be used here.

Finally, let’s take a look at the third place that punctuation should not be used
—after a preposition. Here are some incorrect examples:

      The fundraising contest offered rewards of: giftcards,
      headphones, and sneakers.      x

      You should try to listen to the new album with—an open
      mind.    x

Once again, no punctuation should be used other than the commas in the list
in the first sentence above. College Board particularly likes to test this rule
when there is a list. It helps to remember that while you might be tempted to
use a colon when there is a list, the colon can only follow an independent
clause, which won’t be the case after a preposition.


INDEPENDENT VS. DEPENDENT CLAUSES
DRILL ANSWERS
   1. Independent
   2. Dependent
   3. Dependent
 4. Dependent
 5. Independent
 6. Independent
 7. Dependent
 8. Dependent
 9. Independent
10. Dependent
Dependent Clauses, Lists, and No
Punctuation Drill
Answers can be found starting on this page.

Time: 8 minutes

  1.      Mark for Review
       Stephen Pile’s The Book of Heroic Failures describes a variety of
       instances of individual and group deficiency. For example, the chapter
       “Off Work” describes English as She Is Spoke, a guide to English
       conversation for Portuguese speakers. However, the phrases included
       in this book are typically inaccurate or ________ its author, Pedro
       Carolino, did not speak English and instead relied on two translation
       books: a Portuguese-to-French and a French-to-English.

       Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the conventions
       of Standard English?

         A unidiomatic because

         B unidiomatic,

         C unidiomatic. Because

         D unidiomatic: because


  2.      Mark for Review
       Throughout his life, Indian musician Ram Narayan brought attention to
       the instrument sarangi ________ playing major music festivals as a
       solo artist, recording albums, and eventually touring internationally.
     Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the conventions
     of Standard English?

       A by:

       B by—

       C by,

       D by


3.      Mark for Review
     As suggested by the research of Lisa Espinosa of the Emotion Lab at
     the Karolinska Institute, the reason that people may have intrusive
     memories with neutral ________ is that the neutral content was paired
     with a negative experience in the past, such as seeing a picture of an
     umbrella while receiving a mild electric shock.

     Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the conventions
     of Standard English?

       A content

       B content;

       C content:

       D content,


4.      Mark for Review
     Diane E. Benson is a creative writer and actress from Alaska who also
     ran for governor. She first ventured into politics in ________ she ran
     for office alongside Desa Jacobson, representing the first two Native
     women to share a ticket together.
     Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the conventions
     of Standard English?

        A 2002, when

        B 2002,

        C 2002; when

        D 2002


5.      Mark for Review
     Scientists have discovered that the area of the human brain responsible
     for self-serving choices is separate from the area that is responsible for
     altruistic choices. The hope is that this research will help scientists
     discover the motivation behind philanthropic behaviors, for instance,
     donating to charities, such as animal ________ such as recycling
     plastic and other materials; and helping strangers with tasks, such as
     holding the door for someone to walk through.

     Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the conventions
     of Standard English?

        A shelters; adopting environmental habits,

        B shelters, adopting environmental habits;

        C shelters, adopting environmental habits,

        D shelters; adopting environmental habits;


6.      Mark for Review
     The chemical composition of Jupiter’s atmosphere is relatively well-
     known due to the observations made by the Galileo atmospheric probe
     in 1995. The ratios of helium to hydrogen and phosphorus to hydrogen
     in Jupiter’s atmosphere are relatively close to the same ratios for the
     Sun. However, for other elements, Jupiter’s atmosphere has a much
     greater abundance: the ratio of nitrogen to hydrogen in Jupiter is about
     3.5 times as great as that of the Sun; carbon to ________ and krypton to
     hydrogen, 2.7 times as great.

     Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the conventions
     of Standard English?

         A hydrogen 2.9 times as great;

         B hydrogen 2.9 times as great,

         C hydrogen, 2.9 times as great,

         D hydrogen, 2.9 times as great;


DEPENDENT CLAUSES, LISTS, AND NO
PUNCTUATION DRILL ANSWERS AND
EXPLANATIONS
1.   A

     In this Rules question, punctuation is changing in the answer choices.
     Look for independent clauses. The first part of the sentence says
     However, the phrases included in this book are typically inaccurate
     or unidiomatic, which is an independent clause. The second part of the
     sentence says because its author, Pedro Carolino, did not speak
     English and instead relied on two translation books: a Portuguese-
     to-French and a French-to-English, which is a dependent clause.
     Eliminate any option that doesn’t correctly connect an independent + a
     dependent clause.
          (A) is correct because independent + dependent can be connected
          with no punctuation.

          (B) is wrong because eliminating because changes the second
          clause to an independent clause, and independent + independent
          can’t be connected with a comma alone.

          (C) is wrong because a dependent clause can’t stand alone as a
          sentence.

          (D) is wrong because independent + dependent cannot be
          connected with punctuation other than a comma.

2.   D

     In this Rules question, punctuation is changing in the answer choices.
     Look for independent clauses. The first part of the sentence says
     Throughout his life, Indian musician Ram Narayan brought attention
     to the instrument sarangi by, which ends with a preposition. There
     should not be punctuation after a preposition, so eliminate answers
     with punctuation.

          (A), (B), and (C) are wrong because punctuation cannot come
          after a preposition.

          (D) is correct because no punctuation should be used here.

3.   A

     In this Rules question, punctuation is changing in the answer choices.
     The first part of the sentence says the reason that people may have
     intrusive memories with neutral content is that, and it contains the
     subject-verb pair reason and is. There should not be a single
     punctuation mark between the subject and verb, so eliminate answers
     with punctuation.
          (A) is correct because no punctuation should be used here.

          (B), (C), and (D) are wrong because a single punctuation mark
          cannot come between a subject and a verb.

4.   A

     In this Rules question, punctuation is changing in the answer choices.
     The first part of the sentence says She first ventured into politics in
     2002, which is an independent clause. The second part of the sentence
     says she ran for office alongside Desa Jacobson, which is an
     independent clause; however, with the addition of when, it becomes a
     dependent clause: when she ran for office alongside Desa Jacobson.
     Eliminate any option that doesn’t correctly connect the two clauses.

          (A) is correct because independent + dependent can be connected
          with a comma.

          (B) and (D) are wrong because without when the second clause is
          independent, and independent + independent cannot be connected
          with a comma by itself or no punctuation.

          (C) is wrong because independent + dependent cannot be
          connected with a semicolon.

5.   A

     In this Rules question, commas are changing in the answer choices. The
     sentence already contains a semicolon near the end, and the part after it
     is not an independent clause, which suggests that the sentence contains
     a list separated by semicolons. Use the third example to determine the
     structure of each item: Philanthropic behavior, Comma, Example. Make
     an annotation of this pattern and eliminate any answer that doesn’t
     follow it.
          (A) is correct because it follows the pattern of the third item.

          (B) and (C) are wrong because they don’t have a semicolon after
          the second item.

          (D) is wrong because a comma, not a semicolon, should follow
          the philanthropic behavior.

6.   D

     In this Rules question, commas are changing in the answer choices. The
     sentence already contains a semicolon near the end, and the part after it
     is not an independent clause, which suggests that the sentence contains
     a list separated by semicolons. Use the third example to determine the
     structure of each item: Elements, Comma, Comparison. Make an
     annotation of this pattern and eliminate any answer that doesn’t follow
     it.

          (A) and (B) are wrong because there is no comma between the
          elements and the comparison.

          (C) is wrong because it doesn’t have a semicolon after the second
          item.

          (D) is correct because it follows the pattern of the third item.
Summary
 A dependent clause has a subject and a verb but begins with a
 subordinating word.

 A dependent clause can be connected to an independent clause in either
 order. In some cases a comma is used, and in other cases no punctuation
 is used.

 No other punctuation besides a comma can come between an
 independent and a dependent clause in either order.

 In a list of three or more things, there must be commas in between the
 items and before the word and or or before the last item.

 If one or more items in the list has a comma within it, the list will be
 separated by semicolons.

 Establish the pattern of a list by looking at a complete item in the text.

 Never put a single punctuation mark between a subject and a verb.

 Don’t use punctuation unless there is a reason to do so.
Chapter 16
Rules Questions: Grammar
The Rules category covers both punctuation and grammar. In this chapter,
we’ll look at the remaining topics (verbs, pronouns, nouns, and modifiers)
and see how the Digital SAT tests consistency in these subject areas.
LET’S GET GRAMMATICAL
Now that you have learned everything there is to know about sentence
construction on the Digital SAT, it’s time to move on to the other component
of the Rules questions: grammar. Don’t worry, there are far fewer rules to
know when it comes to this topic. In fact, we’re going to boil it down to a
single word: Consistency. All of the rules we are going to go over in this
chapter tie back to Consistency. This means, for example, your verbs are
consistent with each other in tense, your pronouns are consistent with the
nouns they’re replacing, and your describing phrases are consistent with the
people or things they’re describing. Let’s take a look at the specific topics to
which Consistency applies.


VERBS
You already learned a great deal about verbs in the sentence structure portion
of this book. For instance, you learned that only certain types of verbs can be
the main verb in a sentence (that is, not -ing verbs or “to” verbs), and you
also learned that multiple verbs that are part of a list within a sentence must
be in the same form. There are two additional, major ways that verbs are
tested on the Digital SAT. The first one is subject-verb agreement.

You already know that every sentence must have a subject and a verb. Once
we stop thinking about structure, though, we can take things a step further: the
subject and verb must agree. As we know, subjects are usually nouns, and
nouns can be either singular or plural. As it turns out, verbs can also be
singular or plural. So, if your subject is singular, then your verb needs to be
singular as well, and vice versa. Even if you haven’t thought about this much,
it’s something you do every day when you speak or write. Let’s see some
examples.

      The assignment is due on Friday.         ✓

      The assignments are due on Friday.           ✓
In the first example, both the subject and the verb are singular. In the second
example, both are plural. If we try to mix that up, your ear will probably tell
you that it’s wrong:

       The assignment are due on Friday.            x

       The assignments is due on Friday.        x

Of course, it would be great if the Digital SAT would give you sentences as
simple as these. You’d have no trouble with such an obvious question (and
once in a while you may get lucky with one of those on your test).
Unfortunately, and probably to no one’s surprise, College Board has some
tricks to make subject-verb agreement a little more challenging. Let’s see an
example.




  1.      Mark for Review
       Susan Sontag was an American writer and activist who wrote
       extensively throughout her life. One of her many focuses ________
       photography; in her book of essays, On Photography, she wrote about
       how photography influences people’s relationship to the world.

       Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the conventions
       of Standard English?

         A have been

         B are

         C was

         D were
                               Watch Us Crack It



Here’s How to Crack It
Start by looking at the question to determine that this falls into the Rules
category. Next, look at the answers to see that verbs are changing, so the
question is testing consistency with verbs. Start by identifying and
highlighting the subject. Although the word focuses comes right before the
blank, be careful. The sentence is not saying that “her focuses were/are
photography” (which doesn’t really make sense anyway since photography is
only one thing). It’s describing photography as one of her focuses. So, the
subject is One, which is singular. Highlight this word and write an annotation
saying “singular.” In order to be consistent, you need to use a singular verb.
Choices (A), have been; (B), are; and (D), were, are all plural. Eliminate
them and the correct answer is (C), which is singular.



Most students would look at the answers on a question like the one above
and assume that the question is testing verb tense. As it turns out, you didn’t
need to worry about the tense at all. You could have spent a long time
deciding whether you needed past or present tense and even trying to choose
between two different options in similar tenses.

To save time, always find the subject before worrying about tense. We can’t
promise this will always be the case, but most of the time, if not all the time,
College Board does not test tense at the same time as testing number (which
is the term for singular vs. plural). This means that once you recognize that
the question is testing number, you don’t need to think about tense. You only
need to find the subject and eliminate the answers that don’t match.

Of course, in order to answer these questions correctly, you need to know the
difference between singular and plural subjects and verbs. Let’s see what
those look like.

Singular subjects
     Most nouns that don’t end in -s (dog, book, teacher, airplane, approval,
     bravery, person)
     Nouns that end in -s but refer to only one thing (boss, dress, bus, gas,
     glass, happiness, success)
     -ing verbs (swimming, running, watching, dancing)
     Collective nouns (team, group, family, army)
     Singular pronouns (she, he, it, this, each, everybody, anyone, nothing,
     everywhere)
Plural subjects
     Nouns that end in -s where the version without the -s or -es is singular
     (dogs, books, teachers, airplanes, teams, groups, families, bosses,
     dresses, buses, gases, glasses)
     Irregular plurals that don’t end in -s (children, mice, teeth, men,
     women, people, deer)
     Plural pronouns (we, they, these, those, both, many)
     Two or more things joined with and (my parents and I, Hallie and
     Amelia)

Like we said earlier, a lot of this will probably be intuitive. For instance,
students often think the word team must be plural because a team must
include more than one person. However, these same students would never
say “The team are”—they say “The team is.” So, they do know the word is
singular because they match it correctly with is. In fact, this is the strategy we
recommend when you’re not sure whether a word is singular or plural:
        If you’re not sure whether the subject of a sentence is singular
            or plural, try putting “is” and “are” after the word. If it
         matches with “is,” it’s singular. If it matches with “are,” it’s
                                      plural.


Another aspect of this topic that can be tricky is determining whether a verb
is singular or plural. You might assume a verb like “wants” is plural because
it ends in -s. While we know that nouns ending in -s are usually plural, this
isn’t the case for verbs. In fact, it’s usually the opposite. You would say “it
wants” or “they want.” Here’s our trick for testing whether a verb is singular
or plural:



          If you’re not sure whether a verb is singular or plural, try
        putting “it” and “they” before the verb. If it matches with “it,”
               it’s singular. If it matches with “they,” it’s plural.


The hardest part about subject-verb agreement on the Digital SAT actually
isn’t determining whether the subject or verb is singular or plural, especially
once you know the strategies we just mentioned. The part students have the
most difficulty with is finding the subject. In the previous chapters, we
circled the subjects and underlined the verbs in the example sentences. You
may have noticed that the subject almost always comes before the verb. This
is where things get tricky: the subject is likely going to be before the verb,
but it may not be right before the verb.

In Question 1 from this chapter, that was the case: the phrase of her many
focuses separated the subject (one) from the verb (was). Let’s take a closer
look at that phrase. It starts with the word of, which you should remember as
being a preposition, and therefore this is a prepositional phrase. Putting one
or more prepositional phrases in between the subject and the verb is one of
the most common ways the Digital SAT likes to try to trick you on subject-
verb agreement questions. Let’s see some examples.

      The words of the poem were strange and hard to
      understand.    ✓

      Animals in the wild spend their days looking for food.     ✓

      The hall of mirrors makes people bump into the walls.        ✓

      Swimming in the lake while wearing shoes is a bad idea.
      ✓

In the examples above, College Board wants you to think that the word
directly before the verb is the subject. Then you would say “poem was,”
“wild spends,” “mirrors make,” and “shoes are,” respectively, and get all
four questions wrong. This is why it’s so important to correctly locate the
subject.

There are other ways to separate the subject and the verb besides
prepositional phrases:

      Sewing your own clothes has become more expensive than
      buying clothes.   ✓

      A bicycle that has three wheels is actually called a
      tricycle.    ✓

      The person watering the plants lives over there.       ✓

      Prairie dogs , which live in North America, have elaborate
      societies.     ✓
Once again, College Board would want you to think “clothes have,” “wheels
are,” “plants live,” and “North America has,” respectively. But we’re sure
you wouldn’t make that mistake now that you have learned subject-verb
agreement! Just in case, though, try out the following drill to ensure that you
can correctly find the subject for a given verb in a sentence.


SUBJECTS AND VERBS DRILL
Circle the subject of each underlined verb. Watch out for describing phrases
between the subject and the verb. Answers are on this page.

   1. The collection of books, magazines, and movies available at the library
      covers a broad range of topics.

   2. Fishes living in the lake include bass, crappie, and muskellunge.

   3. Even if one may be embarrassed, dancing with your friends at a party is
      very fun.

   4. Members of the jury have a serious responsibility to consider all the
      facts when deciding a case.

   5. The jury, after deliberating in private, decides which side has won.

   6. The United States has a history of success in international sports
      competitions.

   7. Making one’s bed in the morning starts the day on the right foot.

   8. A passport and a plane ticket are necessary in order to travel to another
      continent.

   9. Games developed by Gary Gygax, such as Chainmail and Dungeons
      and Dragons, are among the most popular games played today.
 10. In algebra, letters towards the end of the alphabet, such as x, y, and z,
     usually represent variables.

We mentioned earlier that questions that look like they are testing tense may
actually be testing number. Of course, sometimes the question is testing tense.
Let’s see an example.




   2.      Mark for Review
        Broadcast stations, such as radio and television stations, are identified
        by their unique call signs. In the U.S., stations west of the Mississippi
        River use K as the first letter of their call signs. Those east of the
        Mississippi River ________ W.

        Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the conventions
        of Standard English?

           A will use

           B have used

           C were using

           D use


Here’s How to Crack It
Start by looking at the question, which reveals that the topic here is Rules. In
that case, consult the answers to see what’s being tested. Verbs are changing
in the answer choices, so the question is testing consistency with verbs. Start
by finding the subject, which is Those. Highlight this word, which is plural,
so try putting a plural word such as “They” before each answer choice.
“They will use,” “They have used,” “They were using,” and “They use” all
work, so there isn’t an issue of subject-verb agreement.
Consider tense next, as the answers are in different tenses. The previous two
sentences use present tense verbs: are and use. Highlight those verbs. In
order to be consistent, this sentence should also be in present tense. Write an
annotation that says “present tense.” Eliminate (A), which is future tense,
(B), which isn’t exactly present tense, and (C), which is past tense. Choice
(D) is in present tense, so it’s the correct answer. It’s consistent with are and
use in the previous sentence, as there is no indication of a shift in tense.



You might be thinking that the last question seemed pretty easy. It’s usually
not too hard to choose among past, present, and future tenses. But what about
the different variations of those tenses? Let’s see another example.




   3.      Mark for Review
        The National Raisin Reserve was created in the U.S. after World War
        II. The reserve allowed the government to take a portion of raisins
        produced by farmers, thus limiting supply and increasing the price. A
        U.S. Supreme Court case ________ the reserve in 2015.

        Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the conventions
        of Standard English?

          A ends

          B has ended

          C will end

          D ended


Here’s How to Crack It
Use the question to identify that this falls under the Rules category. Then,
look at the answers to see that verbs are changing, so it’s testing consistency
with verbs. In that case, you need to check first for subject-verb agreement.
Locate and highlight the subject, which is U.S. Supreme Court case. That’s
singular, but all of the answers work with “it,” so the question isn’t testing
number.

Next, consider tense. Highlight the phrase in 2015, which indicates that this
event happened in the past. Make an annotation that says “past tense.”
Eliminate (A) because it’s present tense. Keep (B) because it could refer to
something in the past. Eliminate (C) because it’s future tense. Keep (D)
because it’s past tense.

Compare (B) and (D). The verb has ended should be used when referring to
the present. If something has ended it means that by this point (now) it is
over. However, the sentence does not go up to the present; it refers to an
event that occurred in 2015. So, eliminate (B). Choice (D) is the only one in
regular past tense, which is what we need here to refer to an event that
occurred at a specific time in the past. The correct answer is (D).



Present Perfect vs. Past Perfect
The two tenses that students tend to have the most trouble with on the Digital
SAT are present perfect and past perfect. Of course, you don’t need to know
these terms for the test. Let’s take a look at some examples:

      Past: I went to the museum in 2017.

      Present perfect: I have been to the museum before.

      Present perfect: I have been to the museum several times.
      Past perfect: I had been to the museum before the new wing
      opened.

Past tense, or simple past tense, is used for an event that occurred at some
time in the past. The first example occurred in 2017.

Present perfect always uses the helping verb has (singular) or have (plural).
This tense implies something that happened at an indefinite time (before) or
multiple times (several times) and suggests that it could happen again. In the
two present perfect examples, the implication is that this person could go to
the museum again.

Past perfect always uses the helping verb had. This tense suggests that
something happened before something else that was also in the past. In our
example, sometime in the past the new wing opened. Even before that, I had
been to the museum. We use had to show that going to the museum happened
before the other past tense verb.

Try the following drill to test your proficiency in verb tense.


VERB TENSE DRILL
Circle the correct tense based on the clue in each sentence. Answers are on
this page.

   1. They study / studied / have studied every night this week.

   2. Next year, after her birthday, she visits / visited / will visit her cousins.

   3. Today, I am / was / will be ready to perform for my school.

   4. I was / am / had been working on my project every day before it was
      finished.

   5. Yesterday, he goes / went / will go to the park to watch birds.
   6. The team went / had gone / has gone to the state championship last
      year.



       When you see verbs changing in the answer choices…

         1. If there is a “to” form and/or an -ing form, check for a
            complete sentence.
         2. Otherwise, find the subject and eliminate any answers
            that aren’t consistent in number (singular/plural) with the
            subject.
         3. If needed, check tense. Look for other verbs in the
            sentence or surrounding sentences, as well as time-
            change clues.



PRONOUNS
Let’s start with the basics: What is a pronoun? A pronoun is a word that
stands in for a noun. It would sound very repetitive and annoying to say,
“Sara brought Sara’s book to show Sara’s grandma,” wouldn’t it? Instead,
we would say “Sara brought her book to show her grandma.” The pronoun
her in this sentence refers back to Sara. Here are the personal pronouns in
English:

                                     Singular            Plural
        First person                 I                   We
        Second person                You                 You
        Third person                 He/she/it           They

While understanding first, second, and third person isn’t crucial for success
on the Digital SAT, it is important to understand which pronouns are singular
and which are plural, especially for the most commonly tested ones—it and
they. A lot of times students think that the difference between these pronouns
is that it is for objects and they is for people. But if we think about that a
little more, we’ll realize that idea isn’t true. Here’s an example to illustrate:

      The markers are on the table.

      They are on the table.

We can use the word they to talk about a bunch of markers, right? So, they
can be used for people and objects. The real difference between these two is
that they is plural and it is singular. This can be difficult to remember
because there are many places in real life that we use they when we are not
referring to something plural. For example, let’s say you went to the
drugstore looking for your favorite brand of toothpaste and couldn’t find it. It
sounds perfectly natural to tell your family, “They were out of the
toothpaste!” Who’s they? The store? A store is really an “it,” so you would
want to say, “It was out of the toothpaste.” Of course, we’re well aware that
that sentence sounds ridiculous. This just goes to show you that spoken
English and written English are different.

                 In real life, some individuals prefer to use “they” as a
                 personal pronoun. When it comes to the Digital SAT,
                 however, “they” is always plural.


Remember, your goal here is to ace the Digital SAT. You don’t necessarily
need to follow these grammar rules when you speak, text, or write emails,
but you do need to know them if you want to get the Writing questions correct
on the Digital SAT.

Let’s see an example of how this could be tested.
   4.      Mark for Review
        A carillon is a type of percussion instrument consisting of a keyboard
        and bells. The clappers of the bells are connected to the keyboard. To
        be classified as a carillon, the instrument must have at least 23 bells; if
        not, ________ considered a chime.

        Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the conventions
        of Standard English?

           A it is

           B they are

           C those are

           D one is


Here’s How to Crack It
First, look at the question to identify the category: Rules. Then, look to see
that pronouns are changing in the answer choices, so it’s testing consistency
of pronouns. In that case, look for and highlight the noun that the pronoun
refers back to, which is the instrument in the earlier part of the sentence.
That’s singular, so a singular pronoun is needed. Eliminate (B) and (C)
because they are both plural.

While one is singular, it cannot refer back to the instrument, as that is a
specific noun. We’ll show you the correct use of one in a minute, but for now,
eliminate (D). Choice (A) is singular and is appropriate to refer back to the
instrument, so it’s the correct answer.



It’s important to keep in mind that the Digital SAT tests it versus they the vast
majority of the time when pronouns are tested. You will never be asked to
use a pronoun for a person who hasn’t already been referred to using a
pronoun. For example, if you were given a text in which a person was
referred to as “she,” then College Board could ask you to choose a pronoun
later on that would be consistent, such as she, her, or herself. But you will
not be asked to fill in a pronoun for a person if one has not already been
given.

Just Say No
On the Digital SAT, each question has to have four answer choices.
However, sometimes College Board just wants to test it versus they or them.
The writers still have to put in two more answer choices, so they will give
you some weird pronoun options to round out the four choices. Let’s take a
look at when and why to eliminate them.

    The pronoun you is almost certainly going to be wrong, as College
    Board almost never writes texts that refer to the reader. Only use you if
    the text has already used a form of this pronoun elsewhere in the text.
    The same is true for we.
    The pronoun one by itself usually refers to a person (One shouldn’t
    wear wet socks). It can refer back to a noun (Mateo had a popsicle, but
    I didn’t want one), but only if that noun is nonspecific. It can’t stand in
    for a noun introduced with “the.” Neither of these situations is very
    likely to show up on the Digital SAT.
    The pronouns this, those, or these are also not likely to be correct. They
    are typically not going to be specific enough if they are not followed by
    a noun (this idea, those paintings, these books).

Pronouns and Apostrophes
The other common way pronouns are tested is with apostrophes. There are
only two simple rules to know:


              Apostrophes on pronouns represent contractions.
                    Possessive pronouns don’t get apostrophes.


Let’s try an example question.




  5.      Mark for Review
       The slow loris, a type of primate that lives in rainforests in South and
       Southeast Asia, is threatened by both habitat loss and the wildlife trade.
       The popularity of the slow loris as an exotic pet is due to ________
       large eyes, which people view as charming.

       Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the conventions
       of Standard English?

          A its

          B they’re

          C their

          D it’s


Here’s How to Crack It
The question reveals that this is a Rules question. Look at the answers to see
that pronouns and apostrophes are changing, so this question is testing
possessive pronouns versus contractions as well as pronoun consistency.
Start with the consistency part and highlight the word the pronoun refers back
to. Whose large eyes? They belong to the slow loris. Highlight this phrase,
which is singular. Eliminate (B) and (C) because they are both plural.

Next, consider whether a contraction is needed. Choice (D) means “it is,”
which isn’t correct here (“it is large eyes”). Eliminate (D). Choice (A), its,
is the possessive form of it, which is appropriate because the slow loris is
an it, and it possesses the large eyes. Therefore, (A) is correct.



A contraction is a shorter way of saying two words. The apostrophe stands in
for the letter or letters that have been removed. Here are some common
contractions and their meanings:

                It’s           It is / It has
                They’re        They are
                You’re         You are
                Who’s          Who is / Who has

Here are some common possessive pronouns and their meanings:

                Its          Belonging to it
                Their        Belonging to them
                Your         Belonging to you
                Whose        Belonging to whom

College Board loves to test its/it’s and their/they’re, as in the previous
example. In fact, those are the only pronouns you’re likely to see tested with
apostrophes. As long as you remember these simple rules, you’ll get those
questions right every time.



       When you see pronouns changing in the answer choices…

         1. Look for and highlight the noun or pronoun that the blank
            refers back to.
           2. Eliminate any answers that are not consistent with the
              noun or pronoun in terms of singular versus plural.
           3. If apostrophes are changing, determine whether a
              contraction or a possessive pronoun is needed and use
              POE accordingly.



NOUNS
We just saw how apostrophes are tested with pronouns. Another apostrophe
topic relates to nouns. Let’s see an example.




  6.      Mark for Review
       N. K. Jemisin is an award-winning American science fiction and
       fantasy writer. The three books in her series The Broken Earth Trilogy
       each won a Hugo Award for Best Novel, making her the first author to
       win this award for each book in a trilogy and the first to win Best
       Novel awards for three consecutive years. Her ________ include
       environmental crises and social inequalities.

       Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the conventions
       of Standard English?

         A books’ subjects

         B books subjects

         C books’ subjects’

         D books subjects’


Here’s How to Crack It
Start by using the question to identify that this falls under the Rules category.
Then, look at the answers to see what’s changing: noun apostrophes. An
apostrophe on a noun shows possession, so start with the first noun and
consider whether it’s possessing something. Does something belong to the
books? Yes, it’s the subjects of the books. So, there should be an apostrophe
on books. Eliminate (B) and (D) because they don’t have an apostrophe on
that word.

Next, determine whether the subjects possess anything. The word after
subjects is include, which is a verb, so it can’t be possessed. Therefore,
subjects shouldn’t have an apostrophe. It’s plural, not possessive. Eliminate
(C). The correct answer is (A).



Unlike pronouns, nouns use apostrophes to show possession. For a singular
noun, simply add an apostrophe + s to make the noun possessive. Here are
some examples:

      a hat’s logo

      the story’s meaning

      the dress’s sleeves

As we saw earlier, most nouns take on an -s when they become plural. For
most plural possessives, make the original noun plural by adding -s or -es
and then add the apostrophe after. Here are some plural possessives:

      hats’ logos

      the stories’ meanings

      the dresses’ sleeves
For irregular plurals that don’t end in -s, make the word plural and then add
the apostrophe + s:

      a woman’s coat → women’s coats

      my tooth’s root → my teeth’s roots

      the person’s letter → the people’s letter



       When you see apostrophes on nouns changing in the
       answer choices…

         1. Determine whether the first word is possessing anything.
            If not, eliminate options with apostrophes on that word.
         2. Determine whether any additional words are possessing
            anything. Remember that a possessive noun must be
            followed by something that can be possessed (i.e.,
            another noun).
         3. Use POE.



                 It’s possible but rare to have two words in a row with
                 apostrophes. A noun can only have an apostrophe if
                 the next word is a noun—in other words, it must be
                 something that can be possessed.



MODIFIERS
Earlier in this book, you saw how describing phrases, such as noun phrases
or those beginning with an -ing or -ed verb, are usually separated from the
rest of the sentence with commas. Describing phrases, also known as
modifiers, can also be tested in terms of wording, not just punctuation.
Consider the following sentence:

       Made with organic oils and plant butters, Noah sold out of his
       natural soaps at the craft fair.  x

Do you spot the error? While you might understand that the soap is made
with organic oils and plant butters, the way the sentence is written, Noah is
the one made with these ingredients, which sounds ridiculous once you
realize it.

This grammar error is called a misplaced modifier. According to this rule, a
describing phrase or “modifier” (in this case, Made with organic oils and
plant butters) needs to come as close as possible to the thing it’s describing.
Here are two ways the sentence above could be rewritten.

       Made with organic oils and plant butters, Noah’s natural
       soaps sold out at the craft fair.   ✓

       Noah sold out of his natural soaps, made with organic oils
       and plant butters, at the craft fair. ✓

As you can see, the sentence can be rewritten so that the thing being
described comes right before or after the modifying phrase.

Let’s see an example of how this could be tested on the Digital SAT.




  7.      Mark for Review
       Starting in 2008, over 50 U.S. embassies across 38 countries installed
       air monitors and regularly posted social media updates about the air
       quality at those locations. Studying the impact of these posts,
       ________.
     Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the conventions
     of Standard English?

        A researchers’ findings were a reduction in fine particulate
           concentration levels in those locations.

        B researchers found a reduction in fine particulate
           concentration levels in those locations.

        C a reduction in fine particulate concentration levels in those
           locations was found by researchers.

        D there was a reduction in fine particulate concentration
           levels in those locations, according to researchers.


Here’s How to Crack It
Begin by looking at the question, which reveals that this is a Rules question.
Then, look at the answers to see what’s changing. The answer choices seem
to be starting with different subjects, which is a good clue that the sentence
may be testing consistency with a modifier. Start at the beginning of the
sentence to see if there is a modifying phrase. It starts with Studying the
impact of these posts, which is a modifier as it would describe the person
doing the studying. Highlight this phrase.

Next, look at the beginning of each answer choice to see whether it refers to
someone who studies something. Eliminate (A) because it says researchers’
findings, not researchers. The findings can’t be studying something. Keep
(B) because researchers could study something. Eliminate (C) because a
reduction can’t study something. Eliminate (D) because there was doesn’t
refer to anything specific that would be studying something. Thus, (B) is the
correct answer.
When this topic is tested on the Digital SAT, College Board will usually put
the blank after the describing phrase. That means all you have to do is look at
the first few words of each answer choice to see whether that’s the person or
thing that could be described by the modifier.


SUBJECTS AND VERBS DRILL ANSWERS
  1. collection
  2. Fishes
  3. dancing
  4. Members
  5. jury
  6. United States
  7. Making (or Making one’s bed)
  8. A passport and a plane ticket
  9. Games
 10. letters


VERB TENSE DRILL ANSWERS
   1. have studied (clue – every night this week)
   2. will visit (clue – Next year)
   3. am (clue – Today)
   4. had been (clue – before it was finished)
   5. went (clue – Yesterday)
   6. went (clue – last year)
Grammar Drill
Answers can be found starting on this page.

Time: 12 minutes

  1.      Mark for Review
       Several dwarf planets, including Pluto, ________ found in the Kuiper
       Belt, a region of space beyond Neptune’s orbit. The Kuiper Belt
       contains many remnants from the solar system’s early history and was
       first explored in 2015 by NASA’s New Horizons mission.

       Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the conventions
       of Standard English?

         A has been

         B are

         C is

         D was


  2.      Mark for Review
       In 1991, American biologists Linda B. Buck and Richard Axel
       published a landmark paper on the olfactory system. The paper detailed
       the discovery of the location of odor receptors in the nose and led to a
       more comprehensive understanding of how humans smell. In 2004,
       ________ received the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine for that
       research.

       Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the conventions
       of Standard English?
       A we

       B one

       C they

       D some


3.      Mark for Review
     Clifford Possum Tjapaltjarri is one of the most recognized and well-
     known Australian artists despite some confusion over the details of his
     life and the exact date of his death. His works are often predicted to
     raise large amounts at auctions and are often purchased by Australian
     galleries. The ________ may have been supported by the Australian
     government to avoid sending such important works internationally.

     Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the conventions
     of Standard English?

       A galleries’ purchases

       B galleries’ purchase’s

       C galleries purchases

       D galleries purchase’s


4.      Mark for Review
     Oglala Lakota poet, writer, and activist Layli Long Soldier published
     her first small poetry book, Chromosomory, in 2010, and her first full-
     length volume of poetry, Whereas, in 2017. The poems in Whereas
     ________ the historical experience of native tribes in the U.S. as well
     as Soldier’s personal experiences and relationships.
     Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the conventions
     of Standard English?

        A explores

        B has explored

        C is exploring

        D explore


5.      Mark for Review
     “Kilroy was here” is a meme that gained popularity in graffiti art
     during World War II. The origin of the meme is debated, but some
     theories claim that German intelligence agents found the meme on
     American weaponry and therefore ________ Kilroy was a high-level
     American spy.

     Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the conventions
     of Standard English?

        A had believed

        B believed

        C would believe

        D were believing


6.      Mark for Review
     Cockatoos in Australia are experts at opening trash bins. The white
     bird can grab the lid of the bin with ________ beak and push toward
     the hinge until the lid flips open. People have used various tools, such
     as bricks or rubber bands, to keep the bins closed, yet the birds are
     undeterred by these obstacles.

     Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the conventions
     of Standard English?

        A their

        B they’re

        C its

        D it’s


7.      Mark for Review
     In 1977, Emily Kame Kngwarreye, an Aboriginal Australian artist,
     learned an art technique from Indonesia called batik. Wanting to
     support other women interested in creating their own art, she founded
     the Utopia Women’s Batik Group with other Aboriginal artists in 1978.
     The Utopia Women’s Batik Group provided a space where the
     development of ________ was supported.

     Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the conventions
     of Standard English?

        A artists’ individual styles’

        B artist’s individual styles

        C artists individual styles

        D artists’ individual styles


8.      Mark for Review
     Kim Hyesoon is a poet from South Korea who currently teaches
     creative writing at an art institute in Seoul. Hoping to align with South
     Korea’s strong movement of female poets in the 1990s, ________ and
     rose to fame as an author of numerous works.

     Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the conventions
     of Standard English?

        A the works written by Hyesoon used imagery and
           experimental language

        B Hyesoon used imagery and experimental language to create
          her pieces

        C numerous works written by Hyesoon used imagery and
           experimental language

        D there was a poet, Hyesoon, who used imagery and
           experimental language


9.      Mark for Review
     Researchers found that some streaked shearwaters, a type of seabird,
     survive typhoons by flying into the storms. When stuck between land
     and a typhoon, the birds will fly toward the eye of the storm, potentially
     reducing ________ risk of crashing into land or hitting debris.

     Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the conventions
     of Standard English?

        A its

        B their

        C it’s
        D they’re


10.      Mark for Review
      NASA originally equipped astronauts with pencils to write in space, as
      ballpoint pens wouldn’t work without gravity; however, pencils could
      smear, break, or catch fire. NASA eventually abandoned its own
      development of a space pen due to costs. However, a private company,
      the Fischer Pen Company, was working on its own space pen.
      Developed by Paul Fischer, ________.

      Which choice completes the text so that it conforms to the conventions
      of Standard English?

        A the Fischer Space Pen’s testing and approval by NASA led
           to its use in Project Apollo.

        B Project Apollo used the Fischer Space Pen after it was
           tested and approved by NASA.

        C NASA tested and approved the Fischer Space Pen for use in
          Project Apollo.

        D the Fischer Space Pen was tested and approved by NASA
           for use in Project Apollo.
GRAMMAR DRILL ANSWERS AND
EXPLANATIONS
1.   B

     In this Rules question, verbs are changing in the answer choices, so it’s
     testing consistency with verbs. Find and highlight the subject, dwarf
     planets, which is plural, so a plural verb is needed. Write an
     annotation saying “plural.” Eliminate any answer that is not plural.

         (A), (C), and (D) are wrong because they are singular.

         (B) is correct because it’s plural.

2.   C

     In this Rules question, pronouns are changing in the answer choices, so
     it’s testing consistency with pronouns. Find and highlight the phrase the
     pronoun refers back to, Linda B. Buck and Richard Axel, which is
     plural, so a plural pronoun is needed. Write an annotation saying
     “plural.” Eliminate any answer that isn’t consistent with Linda B. Buck
     and Richard Axel.

         (A) is wrong because we is not consistent with Linda B. Buck and
         Richard Axel.

         (B) is wrong because one is singular.

         (C) is correct because they is plural and is consistent with Linda
         B. Buck and Richard Axel.

         (D) is wrong because some doesn’t refer back to a specific thing.

3.   A
     In this Rules question, apostrophes with nouns are changing in the
     answer choices. Determine whether each word possesses anything. The
     galleries possess the purchases, but the purchases don’t possess
     anything. Eliminate any answer that doesn’t match this.

         (A) is correct because galleries is possessive and purchases is
         not.

         (B) is wrong because purchases should be plural, not possessive.

         (C) and (D) are wrong because galleries should have an
         apostrophe, as it is possessive.

4.   D

     In this Rules question, verbs are changing in the answer choices, so it’s
     testing consistency with verbs. Find and highlight the subject, poems,
     which is plural, so a plural verb is needed. Write an annotation saying
     “plural.” Eliminate any answer that is not plural.

         (A), (B), and (C) are wrong because they are singular.

         (D) is correct because it’s plural.

5.   B

     In this Rules question, verbs are changing in the answer choices, so it’s
     testing consistency with verbs. Find and highlight the subject, German
     intelligence agents, which is plural, so a plural verb is needed. All of
     the answers work with a plural subject, so look for a clue regarding
     tense. The previous part of the sentence uses a past tense verb: found.
     Highlight that verb, which is past tense, so write an annotation that says
     “past.” Eliminate any answer not in past tense.
         (A) is wrong because had is used when two events occur in the
         past and one event is earlier.

         (B) is correct because it’s past tense.

         (C) and (D) are wrong because would believe and were believing
         aren’t consistent with found.

6.   C

     In this Rules question, pronouns and apostrophes are changing in the
     answer choices, so it’s testing consistency with pronouns. Find and
     highlight the word or phrase that the pronoun refers back to: The white
     bird, which is singular, so in order to be consistent, a singular pronoun
     is needed. Write an annotation saying “singular.” Eliminate any answer
     that isn’t consistent with bird or is incorrectly punctuated.

         (A) and (B) are wrong because they is plural.

         (C) is correct because it is singular and possessive.

         (D) is wrong because it means “it is.”

7.   D

     In this Rules question, apostrophes with nouns are changing in the
     answer choices. Determine whether each word possesses anything. The
     artists possess the individual styles, but the individual styles don’t
     possess anything. Eliminate any answer that doesn’t match this.

         (A) is wrong because styles shouldn’t be possessive.

         (B) is wrong because artist’s is used for one artist, but the passage
         discusses Aboriginal artists.
         (C) is wrong because artists should have an apostrophe, since it is
         possessive.

         (D) is correct because artists is plural and possessive, and
         individual styles is plural but not possessive.

8.   B

     In this Rules question, the subjects of the answers are changing, which
     suggests it may be testing modifiers. Look for and highlight a modifying
     phrase: Hoping to align with South Korea’s strong movement of
     female poets in the 1990s. Whoever is Hoping needs to come
     immediately after the comma. Eliminate any answer that doesn’t start
     with someone who can hope.

         (A) and (C) are wrong because works can’t hope.

         (B) is correct because Hyesoon can hope.

         (D) is wrong because there was can’t hope.

9.   B

     In this Rules question, pronouns and apostrophes are changing in the
     answer choices, so it’s testing consistency with pronouns. Find and
     highlight the word that the pronoun refers back to: birds. This word is
     plural, so in order to be consistent, a plural pronoun is needed.
     Eliminate any answer that isn’t consistent with birds or is incorrectly
     punctuated.

         (A) and (C) are wrong because it is singular.

         (B) is correct because it is plural and possessive.

         (D) is wrong because it means “they are.”
10. D

   In this Rules question, the subjects of the answers are changing, which
   suggests it may be testing modifiers. Look for and highlight a modifying
   phrase: Developed by Paul Fischer. Whatever was Developed by Paul
   Fischer needs to come immediately after the comma. Eliminate any
   answer that doesn’t start with whatever was developed by Paul
   Fischer.

        (A) is wrong because testing and approval were done by NASA,
        not Paul Fischer.

        (B) is wrong because it was the Fischer Space Pen, not Project
        Apollo, that was developed by Paul Fischer.

        (C) is wrong because NASA was not developed by Paul Fischer.

        (D) is correct because the Fischer Space Pen was developed by
        Paul Fischer.
Summary
 When verbs are changing in the answer choices, find the subject,
 determine whether it is singular or plural, and eliminate any answers that
 aren’t consistent. If there are still multiple answers remaining, look for
 clues to determine what tense is needed.

 When pronouns are changing in the answer choices, find the noun or
 other pronoun that the blank refers back to and determine whether it’s
 singular or plural. Eliminate answers that aren’t consistent.

 Apostrophes on pronouns represent contractions. Possessive pronouns
 don’t have apostrophes.

 Apostrophes on nouns show possession. Nouns that are plural but not
 possessive don’t get apostrophes.

 When the subjects of the answers are changing, look for a modifier.
 Eliminate answers that begin with something that couldn’t logically be
 described by the modifier.
Chapter 17
Rhetoric Questions
This chapter covers the final category of questions on the Reading and
Writing section: Rhetoric questions, which are based on the content of the
ideas rather than rules or the structure of the sentences.
The last portion of each Reading and Writing module will include two types
of questions: Transitions and Rhetorical Synthesis, in that order. We call
these Rhetoric questions because they relate to the purpose or quality of the
writing. These questions will not test your understanding of the rule-based
punctuation and grammar topics. In fact, for these questions, all four answer
choices will be or will produce complete sentences that are grammatically
correct. Instead, you will need to consider the content of the writing and how
the answers fulfill certain meaning-related or rhetorical goals. Let’s take a
look at the first type of question in this category.


A SMOOTH TRANSITION
Transition questions will be easy to spot. Let’s look at an example.




  1.      Mark for Review
       Cynthia Leitich Smith is a member of the Muscogee Nation and a
       prolific author of books for children and young adults. She has written
       over a dozen books. ________ she is the author-curator of a Native-
       focused imprint, called Heartdrum, at the publishing company
       HarperCollins.

       Which choice completes the text with the most logical transition?

         A On the other hand,

         B Still,

         C Eventually,

         D Additionally,
Like the question above, all transition questions will ask you the same
question: Which choice completes the text with the most logical transition?
As soon as you see that question, you’ll know you’re dealing with a
transition question. Let’s take a look at the basic approach for transition
questions and apply it to this problem.


                  Transition Questions Basic Approach

         1. Read the text and highlight any ideas that support or
            contradict each other.
         2. Make an annotation indicating whether the ideas
            surrounding the blank agree or disagree.
         3. Eliminate any answers that go the wrong direction. Then,
            use POE on any remaining options.


Here’s How to Crack It
Highlight anything that is the same in the sentence with the blank and the
sentences before or after. The first sentence states that Leitich Smith is a
prolific author. The second sentence supports this by saying She has written
over a dozen books. Then, this sentence says she is the author-curator at a
publishing company. Highlight all of these phrases. These ideas agree, so
make an annotation that says “agree.” Then, eliminate any opposite-direction
transitions since we need a same-direction transition here. Eliminate (A) and
(B), which would both indicate a contrast.

Now, compare the remaining answers. Eventually is used when something is
expected to happen in the future or did happen after a period of time.
However, this sentence is in present tense, so eventually isn’t consistent.
Eliminate (C). This sentence builds on the previous idea, so additionally is
an appropriate transition. Therefore, (see what we did there?) the correct
answer is (D).
Let’s try another example.




  2.      Mark for Review
       Camille Henrot’s installation The Pale Fox is a collection of objects
       that at first glance appears to be random. For example, a sculpture of
       Buddha props up a copy of a modern magazine. There is an
       organization, ________ that is revealed as the audience spends time in
       the space.

       Which choice completes the text with the most logical transition?

         A likewise,

         B specifically,

         C though,

         D rather,


Here’s How to Crack It
Start by highlighting ideas that relate to each other. The first sentence says
that the collection at first glance appears to be random. The third sentence
says There is an organization. These ideas disagree, so write that in an
annotation. Next, eliminate any same-direction transitions: (A) and (B).
Compare (C) and (D). Though works well, so keep (C). While rather is an
opposite-direction transition, it means something more like “instead,” so it
doesn’t fit correctly in this sentence. The correct answer is (C).
Let’s try one more.




  3.      Mark for Review
       Sandra Welner, a medical professor, wanted to make medical care
       more accessible for patients with disabilities. ________ she invented
       an examination table that could be lowered for easier access to and
       from a wheelchair and called it the Universally Accessible
       Examination Table.

       Which choice completes the text with the most logical transition?

         A To that end,

         B Additionally,

         C Not surprisingly,

         D Rather,


Here’s How to Crack It
First, highlight any phrases that draw a connection. The first sentence states
that Welner wanted to make medical care more accessible for patients with
disabilities. The second sentence says she invented the Universally
Accessible Examination Table. These ideas agree, so make an annotation
saying “agree” and eliminate any opposite-direction transitions. In this case,
(D) can be eliminated.

Next, consider the link between the highlighted phrases. The first sentence
states Welner’s goal, while the second sentence states what she did. Use
POE. Choice (A) is a good match because an end is a goal, and this
transition essentially means “with that goal in mind.” Keep (A). Eliminate
(B) because additionally is used to add on to the previous point, but this
would suggest that the sentences are two separate things, when instead the
second sentence explains what she did in pursuit of her goal. Eliminate (C)
because there is no evidence that her invention was not surprising; one
could be surprised or not that she was able to accomplish her goal. The
correct answer is (A).




READY, SET…SYNTHESIZE
Now, let’s move on to the other type of question in the Rhetoric category, the
one that will appear at the very end of each verbal module: Rhetorical
Synthesis. The word synthesize means “put together,” so these questions are
asking you to put together two or more bullet points in order to fulfill a
certain rhetorical goal. Let’s see an example.




  4.      Mark for Review
       While researching a topic, a student has taken the following notes:
            Robin Wall Kimmerer is a writer, educator, and scientist working
            in the field of biocultural restoration.
            She is also a member of the Citizen Potawatomi Nation.
            Her first book, Gathering Moss, published in 2003, contained a
            series of essays about mosses that mixed scientific writing and
            personal reflection together.
            In her second book, Braiding Sweetgrass, Kimmerer’s writing
            weaves together different types of knowledge: the Western
            scientific tradition, Traditional Ecological Knowledge, and
            lessons that plants themselves can teach.
     The student wants to emphasize a similarity between the two books
     Kimmerer wrote. Which choice most effectively uses relevant
     information from the notes to accomplish this goal?

        A Gathering Moss is about moss, and Braiding Sweetgrass is
          about lessons from plants.

        B Gathering Moss and Braiding Sweetgrass both include
          scientific writing.

        C Gathering Moss combines science and personal reflection,
          while Braiding Sweetgrass combines three different types
          of knowledge.

        D Published in 2003, Gathering Moss was written by Robin
          Wall Kimmerer, who has worked in the field of biocultural
          restoration.




                               Watch Us Crack It



Here’s How to Crack It
First, identify the type of question. Rhetorical Synthesis questions are
extremely easy to identify: they are the only question type to use bullet points
instead of text in the form of a paragraph. Then, like with all Reading and
Writing questions, determine what the question is asking. Rhetorical
Synthesis questions always contain the same question: Which choice most
effectively uses relevant information from the notes to accomplish this
goal? The key part to notice is this goal. You MUST read the sentence
before the question to determine what the goal is.

Here, the stated goal is to emphasize a similarity between the two books.
Now, your impulse might be to read the bullet points and identify a similarity.
However, we’ve found that you probably don’t need to do this. Instead,
highlight the task or tasks of the question and then go straight to the answer
choices and eliminate anything that doesn’t completely fulfill the task. In this
case, highlight similarity and two books. Any answer that does not mention
two books or draw a comparison can be eliminated. Let’s go to POE.

Choice (A) mentions the two books, and moss and plants are somewhat
similar, so keep (A). Choice (B) mentions the two books and uses the word
both to state a similarity. Keep (B). Choice (C) mentions both books, but the
word while and the types of content in the books indicate a contrast, not a
similarity. Eliminate (C). Choice (D) only mentions one of the books, so
eliminate it because the question asked about two books.

Finally, compare (A) and (B). Choice (A) does not clearly state that this is a
similarity between the two; it merely presents information about the content
of both books. Eliminate (A). On the other hand, (B) clearly states that there
is a similarity between the two books: they both contain scientific writing.
Therefore, the correct answer is (B).

Of course, we can also confirm that this information is in the bullet points:
the third bullet point states that Gathering Moss contains scientific writing,
and the fourth bullet point mentions that the Western scientific tradition is
part of the book’s content, which clearly indicates that scientific writing is a
component of the book.



Here’s the basic approach for these questions:
                     Rhetorical Synthesis Basic Approach

            1. Read the question and highlight each goal that is
               mentioned.
            2. Eliminate any answer choice that does not completely
               fulfill the goal or goals.
            3. Read the bullet points to confirm the answer if needed.


It’s very unlikely that you will see an answer choice that is inconsistent with
what is stated in the bullet points. That is, you won’t see the kind of wrong
answers that you will see on the Reading questions—ones that could be
arrived at through misreading or making assumptions. Instead, the wrong
answers will simply not completely fulfill the goal or goals stated in the
question. This is why you can save yourself some time by not reading the
bullet points first; you generally won’t need to prove that the information is
supported. It’s also worth remembering that these questions do NOT test you
on punctuation, grammar, style, being concise, or any other Rules topics.
Focus on the content of the sentence in each answer choice and how well it
does or does not fulfill the goal or goals.

Let’s try another one.




   5.      Mark for Review
        While researching a topic, a student has taken the following notes:
             Large animals known as megafauna have substantial impacts on
             their environments.
             However, many native megafauna are extinct, so their effects on
             the ecosystem are unknown.
         Bison are a type of megafauna that used to be dominant in the
         United States.
         Reintroducing bison to their native environments doubled plant
         diversity.
         The presence of cattle, a domesticated megafauna, in the same
         environments produced a significantly lower increase in plant
         diversity.

     The student wants to present one impact that native megafauna have on
     their environments. Which choice most effectively uses relevant
     information from the notes to accomplish this goal?

       A Bison, a type of native megafauna, doubled plant diversity
         in their native environments.

       B Bison and cattle are two types of megafauna that live in the
         United States.

       C Although many native megafauna are extinct, bison were
         reintroduced to their native environment.

       D Native and domesticated megafauna can have impacts on
         their environments.


Here’s How to Crack It
Once you’ve established that you’re dealing with a Rhetorical Synthesis
question, highlight the goal or goals in the question. Here, you should
highlight one impact that native megafauna have on their environments.
The correct answer should relate to native megafauna and a specific
environmental impact. Move on to POE.

Choice (A) mentions a type of native megafauna and describes an
environmental impact (doubled plant diversity), so keep (A). Choice (B)
mentions megafauna, but there’s no environmental impact. Eliminate (B).
Choice (C) mentions native megafauna but does not say the impact of
reintroducing bison; eliminate it. Choice (D) mentions impacts but does not
present one impact; it’s not specific about what that impact might be.
Eliminate (D). The correct answer is (A).



Let’s try one more.




  6.      Mark for Review
       While researching a topic, a student has taken the following notes:
            R. Murray Schafer was a Canadian composer, writer, and
            environmentalist.
            Schafer created many soundscapes during his career.
            Soundscapes are the sounds that arise from a location.
            Soundscapes include animal sounds, natural sounds such as
            weather, and human-created sounds.
            Schafer wrote The Tuning of the World and The Soundscape,
            which are books on soundscapes.

       The student wants to introduce soundscapes to an audience familiar
       with Schafer. Which choice most effectively uses relevant information
       from the notes to accomplish this goal?

         A Canadian composer, writer, and environmentalist R. Murray
           Schafer created and wrote about the collections of animal
           sounds, natural sounds such as weather, and human-created
           sounds known as soundscapes.
        B The Tuning of the World and The Soundscape were written
           by R. Murray Schafer, a Canadian composer, writer, and
           environmentalist.

        C R. Murray Schafer, a Canadian composer, writer, and
          environmentalist, created many soundscapes during his
          career.

        D Schafer wrote about and created soundscapes, which are
          sounds that arise from a location, including animal sounds,
          natural sounds such as weather, and human-created sounds.


Here’s How to Crack It
Identify that this is a Rhetorical Synthesis question, and then highlight the
goal or goals in the question. In this case, you should highlight introduce
soundscapes and audience familiar with Schafer. It’s common for
Rhetorical Synthesis questions to specify whether the audience is familiar or
unfamiliar with something. If the audience is unfamiliar, the answer should
explain who or what the person or thing is, while if the audience is familiar,
the answer should not. Let’s go to POE.

Eliminate (A) because it describes Schafer—the audience is familiar with
Schafer, so he should not be introduced. Eliminate (B) and (C) for the same
reason. No description of Schafer is needed if the audience is familiar with
him. Check (D). This answer does not describe Schafer, but it does introduce
soundscapes by defining what they are. Therefore, this answer fulfills all
parts of the question. The correct answer is (D).




CONCLUSION
While the term Rhetoric might have sounded scary initially, we hope you’re
feeling more confident now that you know how to approach the two types of
questions in this category. Remember, you choose the order of questions—
practice Rhetoric questions on the following drill and use the results to help
determine when to attempt them.
Rhetoric Drill
Answers can be found starting on this page.

Time: 14 minutes

  1.      Mark for Review
       People who are interested in reducing food waste are using banana
       peels in unique ways. ________ banana peels can be dried and ground
       into flour and used in baking. Researchers found that baking cookies
       with banana peel flour led to more healthful cookies.

       Which choice completes the text with the most logical transition?

         A For instance,

         B Fortunately,

         C Still,

         D Moreover,


  2.      Mark for Review
       During the Apollo 14 mission in 1971, astronaut Stu Roosa carried 500
       tree seeds into lunar orbit. Once back on Earth, the seeds were
       germinated and the majority of the trees were successfully planted
       around the world. The locations of the moon trees were not recorded,
       ________ until a renewed interest in them in 1996 led to the creation of
       a database of the rediscovered moon trees and their locations.

       Which choice completes the text with the most logical transition?

         A moreover,
       B for instance,

       C still,

       D however,


3.      Mark for Review
     Emmett Chappelle, a scientist who started working with NASA in the
     1960s, discovered a way to detect extraterrestrial life. He found that
     mixing two chemicals found in fireflies, insects known for their
     bioluminescence, with adenosine triphosphate (ATP) produces light.
     ATP is present in all living organisms. ________ the presence of life
     can be confirmed if light is produced when the two firefly chemicals
     are applied to a sample.

     Which choice completes the text with the most logical transition?

       A Still,

       B Therefore,

       C Nevertheless,

       D Though,


4.      Mark for Review
     Larissa Behrendt’s novel After Story tells the tale of Indigenous lawyer
     Jasmine and her mother Della as they take a literary tour of England.
     During their tour, a girl disappears, echoing the disappearance of
     Jasmine’s older sister twenty-five years earlier. ________ Jasmine
     reexamines her past, and family secrets come to light.

     Which choice completes the text with the most logical transition?
       A Consequently,

       B In conclusion,

       C Similarly,

       D Despite this,


5.      Mark for Review
     Although street art is sometimes treated as commonplace graffiti or
     vandalism, Bright Tetteh Ackwerh has used the medium to represent his
     satirical views on religious and political issues in Ghana. ________
     his goal is to provoke spirited conversation about these topics after
     people view his works.

     Which choice completes the text with the most logical transition?

       A As a rule,

       B Conversely,

       C Accordingly,

       D Subsequently,


6.      Mark for Review
     While researching a topic, a student has taken the following notes:
          Ferrofluid is a liquid created when magnetic nanoparticles are
          dissolved in a solvent.
          The shape of ferrofluid can be manipulated by magnetic fields.
          Sachiko Kodama is a Japanese artist who makes liquid sculptures
          with ferrofluid.
          Her sculptures include Pulsate and Protrude, Flow.

     The student wants to introduce Sachiko Kodama and what her
     sculptures are made of. Which choice most effectively uses relevant
     information from the notes to accomplish this goal?

       A Pulsate and Protrude, Flow by Sachiko Kodama are made
         with ferrofluid, a type of liquid created when magnetic
         nanoparticles are dissolved in a solvent.

       B Sachiko Kodama is a Japanese artist who uses magnetic
          fields to change the shape of ferrofluid to create her
          sculptures.

       C Sachiko Kodama’s ferrofluid sculptures include Pulsate and
          Protrude, Flow.

       D Ferrofluid is a magnetic liquid that can be manipulated into
         sculptures.


7.      Mark for Review
     While researching a topic, a student has taken the following notes:
          Emmanuelle Charpentier, born in 1968, is a French scientist who
          studies microbiology, biochemistry, and genetics.
          Jennifer Doudna, born in 1964, is an American biochemist who
          studies biochemistry and molecular biology.
          Charpentier and Doudna met in 2011.
          They worked together and discovered that CRISPR-Cas9
          technology could be used for genome editing in 2012.
          In 2020, they were both awarded the Nobel Prize in Chemistry.
     The student wants to emphasize the results of Charpentier’s and
     Doudna’s working relationship. Which choice most effectively uses
     relevant information from the notes to accomplish this goal?

       A Charpentier and Doudna both study biochemistry.

       B Charpentier and Doudna met in 2011 and were awarded the
         Nobel Prize in 2020.

       C Charpentier and Doudna discovered how to use CRISPR-
         Cas9 for genome editing and were awarded the Nobel
         Prize in 2020.

       D Charpentier studies genetics, and Doudna studies molecular
         biology.


8.      Mark for Review
     While researching a topic, a student has taken the following notes:
          Kolkata, also known as Calcutta, is in eastern India.
          The Kolkata Metro System was initially planned in the 1920s but
          construction didn’t start until the 1970s.
          The Kolkata Metro System is a rapid transit system featuring two
          train lines.
          The Blue Line runs north-south, opened in 1984, and is 31.36 km
          long.
          The Green Line runs east-west, opened in 2020, and is 9.1 km
          long.

     The student wants to compare the dates of opening and lengths of the
     lines of the Kolkata Metro System to an audience familiar with the
     Kolkata Metro System. Which choice most effectively uses relevant
     information from the notes to accomplish this goal?

       A The Kolkata Metro System opened its second line—the 9.1
         km-long Green Line—in 2020.

       B The 31.36-km-long Blue Line opened in 1984, whereas the
         9.1-km-long Green Line opened in 2020.

       C The Kolkata Metro System, which began construction in the
         1970s, includes the 31.36-km-long Blue Line, which
         opened in 1984, and the 9.1 km-long Green Line, which
         opened in 2020.

       D Kolkata, also known as Calcutta, is located in eastern India
         and began construction on the Kolkata Metro System in the
         1970s.


9.      Mark for Review
     While researching a topic, a student has taken the following notes:
          Various vertebrate species, including honeybees, have the ability
          to judge numbers.
          Researchers were curious about whether bees organize numbers
          spatially from left to right, from smallest to largest.
          Humans organize numbers spatially from left to right, from
          smallest to largest.
          Martin Giurfa and his team trained bees to connect specific
          numbers with a sucrose reward.
          The bees organized the numbers from left to right based on
          magnitude.
      The student wants to emphasize the aim of the research study. Which
      choice most effectively uses relevant information from the notes to
      accomplish this goal?

        A The bees in the study by Martin Giurfa and his team were
          trained with sucrose rewards.

        B Martin Giurfa and his team wanted to see whether bees
          organize numbers spatially from left to right, similar to how
          humans organize numbers.

        C Various vertebrate species, such as humans and honeybees,
           organize numbers spatially from left to right.

        D Martin Giurfa and his team found that bees did organize
          numbers in a similar way to how humans do.


10.      Mark for Review
      While researching a topic, a student has taken the following notes:
           Wolffram’s red salt is an inorganic compound.
           Inorganic chemists in the 20th century were interested in
           Wolffram’s red salt because it has a deep red color but its
           components are colorless.
           In 1935, inorganic chemists H. D. K. Drew and H. J. Tress
           hypothesized that the red color was due to the presence of
           platinum (3+) ions.
           In 1936, inorganic chemist K. A. Jensen proved that Wolffram’s
           red salt did not have platinum (3+) ions.
           In 1956, inorganic chemists Yamada Shoichiro and Tsuchida
           Ryutaro discovered that the red color was due to chains of
           platinum (2+) and platinum (4+) ions.
The student wants to emphasize a similarity among the research to an
audience familiar with Wolffram’s red salt. Which choice most
effectively uses relevant information from the notes to accomplish this
goal?

  A 20th-century research into Wolffram’s red salt, a deep red
    inorganic compound made up of colorless components,
    focused on the presence of various platinum ions.

  B While Drew and Tress hypothesized that Wolffram’s red salt
    was red due to platinum (3+) ions, Jensen proved that
    Wolffram’s red salt did not have platinum (3+) ions.

  C 20th-century hypotheses and research into the color of
     Wolffram’s red salt focused on the presence of various
     platinum ions.

  D Wolffram’s red salt is not deep red due to the presence of
    platinum (3+) ions, as Drew and Tress hypothesized, but
    rather due to chains of platinum (2+) and platinum (4+)
    ions, as discovered by Shoichiro and Ryutaro.
RHETORIC DRILL ANSWERS AND
EXPLANATIONS
1.   A

     This is a transition question, so follow the basic approach. Highlight
     ideas that relate to each other. The first sentence says using banana
     peels in unique ways, and the second sentence says banana peels can
     be dried and ground into flour and used in baking. These ideas agree,
     so a same-direction transition is needed. Make an annotation that says
     “same.” Eliminate any answer that doesn’t match.

         (A) is correct because it is a same-direction transition, and the
         second sentence is an example of the first.

         (B) is wrong because the second sentence is an example, not a new
         idea.

         (C) is wrong because it is an opposite-direction transition.

         (D) is wrong because the second sentence is an example, not an
         additional point.

2.   D

     This is a transition question, so follow the basic approach. Highlight
     ideas that relate to each other. The first part of the sentence says The
     locations of the moon trees were not recorded, and the second part of
     the sentence says until a renewed interest…led to the creation of a
     database of the rediscovered moon trees and their locations. These
     ideas disagree, so an opposite-direction transition is needed. Make an
     annotation that says “opposite.” Eliminate any answer that doesn’t
     match.

         (A) and (B) are wrong because they are same-direction transitions.
         (C) is wrong because still suggests that the second part of the
         sentence is happening despite the first part of the sentence.

         (D) is correct because however is an opposite-direction transition.

3.   B

     This is a transition question, so follow the basic approach. Highlight
     ideas that relate to each other. The first sentence mentions a way to
     detect extraterrestrial life. The third sentence says ATP is present in
     all living organisms, and the final sentence says the presence of life
     can be confirmed…. These ideas agree, so a same-direction transition
     is needed. Make an annotation that says “same.” Eliminate any answer
     that doesn’t match.

         (A), (C), and (D) are wrong because they are opposite-direction
         transitions.

         (B) is correct because Therefore is a same-direction transition,
         and the last sentence provides a conclusion.

4.   A

     This is a transition question, so follow the basic approach. Highlight
     ideas that relate to each other. The previous sentence says echoing the
     disappearance of Jasmine’s older sister twenty-five years earlier, and
     this sentence says Jasmine reexamines her past, and family secrets
     come to light. These ideas agree, so a same-direction transition is
     needed. Make an annotation that says “same.” Eliminate any answer
     that doesn’t match.

         (A) is correct because it is a same-direction transition, and the
         reexamination is a result of what happens on the tour.
         (B) is wrong because this sentence does not summarize the
         previous one.

         (C) is wrong because there is no similar reexamination in the
         previous sentence.

         (D) is wrong because it is an opposite-direction transition.

5.   C

     This is a transition question, so follow the basic approach. Highlight
     ideas that relate to each other. The first sentence says Bright Tetteh
     Ackwerh has used [street art] to represent his satirical views, and the
     second sentence says his goal is to provoke spirited conversation
     about these topics. These ideas agree, so a same-direction transition is
     needed. Make an annotation that says “same.” Eliminate any answer
     that doesn’t match.

         (A) is wrong because the second sentence is not a rule of the first
         sentence.

         (B) is wrong because it is an opposite-direction transition.

         (C) is correct because it is a same-direction transition, and the
         second sentence goes along with the idea in the first.

         (D) is wrong because the second sentence is not an event that
         follows the first sentence.

6.   B

     This is a Rhetorical Synthesis question, so follow the basic approach.
     Highlight the goal(s) stated in the question: introduce Sachiko Kodama
     and what her sculptures are made of. Eliminate any answer that
     doesn’t introduce Sachiko Kodama and describe what her sculptures
     are made of.

         (A) and (D) are wrong because they don’t introduce Sachiko
         Kodama.

         (B) is correct because it introduces Kodama and says she uses
         ferrofluid to create her sculptures.

         (C) is wrong because it doesn’t describe what Kodama’s
         sculptures are made of.

7.   C

     This is a Rhetorical Synthesis question, so follow the basic approach.
     Highlight the goal(s) stated in the question: emphasize the results of
     Charpentier’s and Doudna’s working relationship. Eliminate any
     answer that doesn’t emphasize the results of their relationship.

         (A) and (D) are wrong because they don’t describe the results of
         Charpentier’s and Doudna’s working relationship.

         (B) is wrong because it doesn’t clearly describe what the
         relationship was between Charpentier and Doudna.

         (C) is correct because it describes what Charpentier and Doudna
         worked on together and the result of this work.

8.   B

     This is a Rhetorical Synthesis question, so follow the basic approach.
     Highlight the goal(s) stated in the question: compare the dates of
     opening and lengths of the lines of the Kolkata Metro System to an
     audience familiar with the Kolkata Metro System. Eliminate any
     answer that doesn’t compare the dates of opening and lengths of the
     lines and assume that the audience is familiar with the Kolkata Metro
     System.

         (A) and (D) are wrong because they don’t provide a comparison
         between multiple lines.

         (B) is correct because it makes a comparison of the dates of
         opening and lengths of the lines and doesn’t introduce the Metro
         System, since the audience is familiar.

         (C) is wrong because it explains the Kolkata Metro System, but the
         audience is already familiar.

9.   B

     This is a Rhetorical Synthesis question, so follow the basic approach.
     Highlight the goal(s) stated in the question: emphasize the aim of the
     research study. Eliminate any answer that doesn’t emphasize the aim
     of the research study.

         (A), (C), and (D) are wrong because they don’t mention the aim, or
         what the scientists were trying to do.

         (B) is correct because describes the aim of the research study by
         saying wanted to see.

10. C

     This is a Rhetorical Synthesis question, so follow the basic approach.
     Highlight the goal(s) stated in the question: emphasize a similarity
     among the research to an audience familiar with Wolffram’s red salt.
     Eliminate any answer that doesn’t emphasize a similarity and assume
     that the audience is familiar with Wolffram’s red salt.
(A) is wrong because it explains what Wolffram’s red salt is, but
the audience is familiar.

(B) and (D) are wrong because they don’t emphasize a similarity
among the research.

(C) is correct because it emphasizes a similarity among the
research (the focus) and doesn’t explain Wolffram’s red salt, since
the audience is familiar.
Summary
 For transition questions, look at the previous sentence(s) for a clue that
 relates to something in the sentence with the blank. Highlight any clues.

 Determine whether the ideas agree or disagree, and write a note
 indicating which direction the answer should go.

 Eliminate answers that go the wrong direction, and then use POE with
 the remaining answers.

 For Rhetorical Synthesis questions, highlight the goal(s) stated in the
 question.

 Eliminate answers that don’t completely fulfill the goal or goals.

 Read the bullet points if needed.
Part III
How to Crack the Math Section
 18 Math Introduction
 19 Digital SAT Math: The Big Picture
 20 Fun with Fundamentals
 21 Algebra: Cracking the System
 22 Other Digital SAT Algebra Strategies
 23 Functions and Graphs
 24 Advanced Arithmetic
 25 Geometry and Trigonometry
 26 Fill-Ins
Chapter 18
Math Introduction
As you learned in Chapter 4, the Digital SAT isn’t your typical school test.
This goes for the Math section of the Digital SAT as well as the Reading and
Writing section. This chapter will give you an overview of the Math section,
show you what kind of math to expect, talk about applying the test-taking
strategies you learned in Chapter 4 to the Math section, and introduce you to
the only questions on the Digital SAT that are not multiple-choice.
THE MATH BREAKDOWN
The Math section of the Digital SAT is split into two modules. Each module
contains 22 questions, of which 16 or 17 are multiple-choice questions and
the rest are student-produced response questions (SPR), meaning that you fill
in your own answer instead of choosing from four answers. Questions on the
second module are, on average, easier or harder based on your performance
on the first module. Each module has two “pre-test” questions that do not
count towards your score, but they are not identified, so treat every question
as if it counts.

                 No Need to Know
                 Here are a few things you won’t need to know to
                 answer Digital SAT Math questions: calculus,
                 logarithms, and matrices. Essentially, the Digital
                 SAT tests a whole lot of algebra and some
                 arithmetic, statistics, and geometry.


The Math section is further broken down by question type and content area,
as described below. Unlike the Verbal section, the question types and content
areas do not go in any predictable order. Everything is mixed together, so you
could see a trig question, then a word problem about averages, then a
question about the vertex of a parabola. We’ll cover these topics and many
more in the next several chapters, so you’ll be ready for all of it.


       Question Type Breakdown
       70% Problem Solving: 15–16 questions per module
       30% Word Problems: 6–7 questions per module

       Content Breakdown
       35% Algebra: 7–8 questions per module
       35% Advanced Math: 7–8 questions per module
       15% Problem-Solving & Data Analysis: 3–4 questions per
       module
        15% Geometry and Trigonometry: 3–4 questions per module



Fill-In Questions
Approximately 25% of the questions on the Math section of the Digital SAT
are what College Board calls Student-Produced Response questions, or
SPRs. These are the only questions on the test that are not multiple-choice.
Instead of selecting the correct answer from among several choices, you will
have to find the answer on your own and type it into a box. We call these fill-
ins because you fill in your answer. The fill-in questions cover the same math
topics as the multiple-choice questions do, and they fit within the order of
difficulty of the module. The fill-in format has special characteristics, and
we’ll tell you more about them in Chapter 26.

You Don’t Have to Finish
We’ve all been taught in school that when you take a test, you have to finish
it. If you answered only two-thirds of the questions on a high school math
test, you probably wouldn’t get a very good grade. But as we’ve already
seen, the Digital SAT is not at all like the tests you take in school. Most
students don’t know about the difference, so they make the mistake of trying
to work all of the questions on both Math modules of the Digital SAT.

Because they have only a limited amount of time to answer all the questions,
most students rush through the questions they think are easy in order to get to
the harder ones as soon as possible. At first, it seems reasonable to save
more time for the more challenging questions, but think about it this way.
When students rush through a Math section, they’re actually spending too
little time on the easier questions (which they have a good chance of getting
right), just so they can spend more time on the harder questions (which they
have less chance of getting right). Does this make sense? Of course not.

Here is the secret: on the Math section, you don’t have to answer every
question in each module. In fact, unless you are aiming for a top score, you
should intentionally skip some harder questions. Most students can raise their
Math scores by concentrating on correctly answering all of the questions that
they think are easy or medium difficulty. In other words…

                 Quick Note
                 Remember, this is not a math test in school! It is not
                 scored on the same scale your math teacher uses.
                 You don’t need to get all the questions right to get an
                 above-average score.



Slow Down!
Most students do considerably better on the Math section when they slow
down and spend less time worrying about the more complex questions (and
more time working carefully on the more straightforward ones). Haste causes
careless errors, and careless errors can ruin your score. In most cases, you
can actually raise your score by answering fewer questions. That doesn’t
sound like a bad idea, does it? If you’re shooting for an 800, you’ll have to
answer every question correctly. But if your target is 550, you should ignore
the hardest questions in each module and use your limited time wisely.

POOD and the Math Section
The questions in both modules of the Digital SAT Math section are arranged
in a loose order of difficulty. The earlier questions are generally easier and
the last few are harder, but the level of difficulty may jump around a little.
Furthermore, the second module might start with a question that feels much
easier than the last question of the first module. Assessing the difficulty of a
question is also complicated by the fact that in College Board’s view, “hard”
on the Digital SAT means that a higher percentage of students tend to get it
wrong, often due to careless errors or lack of time.

The two experimental questions in each module can also alter the order of
difficulty. If you encounter a question that seems surprisingly easy or
surprisingly hard based on the questions before and after, use your POOD to
decide whether to do it, mark it for later, or pick your LOTD.
Because difficulty levels can go up and down a bit, don’t worry too much
about how hard the test-writers think a question is. Focus instead on the
questions that are easiest for you, and do your best to get those right—no
matter where they appear—before moving on to the tougher ones. So which
will be the easy ones for you? It is personal order of difficulty, but here are
some things to consider:

    Math knowledge: Do you know the topic cold? Do you see exactly how
    to start solving it? Then the question is worth attempting, but read and
    work carefully!
    SAT knowledge: Is there a Princeton Review technique from this book
    that would be perfect for this question? Now is the time to put your skills
    to use.
    Self-knowledge: Do your eyes glaze over halfway through a word
    problem? Do you think, “More like trigoNOmetry” when you see a trig
    question? Then come back to that question later or just pick your Letter
    of the Day (LOTD).
    Take the first bite: A great way to decide whether a question deserves
    your time is to think about Bite-Sized Pieces. If you know immediately
    how to start a question, there’s a good chance you’ll be able to finish it
    and get it right.


        Don’t forget: Fill in your LOTD for questions you decide to
        skip, use the Mark for Review tool to mark questions to come
        back to later, and enter an answer for every question.



USING THE ONLINE TOOLS AND SCRATCH
PAPER
Online Tools
Several of the built-in features of the Digital SAT will be useful on the Math
section.

    Mark for Review tool to mark questions to come back to later
    Built-in calculator, which can be accessed at any time
    Reference sheet with common geometry formulas, which can be
    accessed at any time
    The Annotate tool is NOT available on the Math section, so you will not
    be able to underline or highlight parts of the question.

Scratch Paper
The proctor at the test center will hand out three sheets of scratch paper, and
you can use your own pen or pencil. Plan ahead about how to use the scratch
paper in combination with what’s on the screen.


                         Use the Tools Effectively!

        Online Tools
        Eliminate wrong answers
        Work steps on the calculator
        Look up geometry formulas

        Scratch Paper
        Rewrite key parts of the question
        Write out every calculation
        Redraw geometric figures and label them
        Rewrite answer choices as needed


Here’s a question from your first practice test with an image of the testing
app screen on the left and scratch paper on the right. On a question like this,
use your scratch paper to rewrite parts of the question and translate them into
math, and then use the Answer Eliminator tool to cross out answers that don’t
match that piece. Always include the question number next to your work on
the scratch paper to keep yourself organized.




Calculators
Calculators are permitted on every Math question on the Digital SAT. In
addition, the testing app includes a built-in calculator with many, many
features. Practice with the built-in calculator or the one you’re planning to
bring with you. We’ll tell you more about calculators as we go along.

The Princeton Review Approach
We’re going to give you the tools you need in order to handle the easier
questions on the Digital SAT Math section, along with several great
techniques to help you crack some of the more difficult ones. But you must
concentrate first on getting the easier questions correct. Don’t worry about
the questions you find difficult on the Math section until you’ve learned to
work carefully and accurately on the easier questions.
When it does come time to look at some of the harder questions, use Process
of Elimination to help you avoid trap answers and to narrow down your
choices if you have to guess. You will learn to use POE to improve your
odds of finding the answer by getting rid of answer choices that can’t
possibly be correct.

Generally speaking, each chapter in this section begins with the basics and
then gradually moves into more advanced principles and techniques. If you
find yourself getting lost toward the end of the chapter, don’t worry.
Concentrate your efforts on principles that are easier to understand but that
you still need to master.
Chapter 19
Digital SAT Math: The Big Picture
In this chapter, you’ll see a few ways you can eliminate bad answer choices,
avoid traps, improve your odds of answering correctly if you have to guess,
and maximize your Math score. You’ll also learn how to best make use of the
built-in calculator, should you choose to use it instead of bringing your own.
THE BIG PICTURE
The Reading and Writing section of this book describes various ways to
eliminate wrong answers. That idea comes into play on the Digital SAT Math
section, as well. There are also ways to break down math questions and
avoid trap answers. This chapter provides an overview of the strategies you
should know in order to maximize your Math score.


BALLPARKING
One way to eliminate answers on the Math section is by looking for ones that
are the wrong size, or that are not “in the ballpark.” We call this strategy
Ballparking. Although you can use your calculator on the following question,
you can also eliminate one answer without doing any calculations.




   1.      Mark for Review
        In a garden, the corn on the north edge of the garden is 30% shorter than
        that on the south edge. If the corn on the south edge of the garden is 50
        inches tall, how tall is the corn on the north edge of the garden, in
        inches?

          A 30

          B 33

          C 35

          D 65


Here’s How to Crack It
The question asks for the height of the corn on the north edge of the garden
and states that the corn there is shorter than the corn on the south edge, which
is 50 inches tall. You are asked to find the height of the corn on the north
edge, so the correct answer must be less than 50. Eliminate (D), which is too
high. Often, one or more of the bad answers on these questions is the result
you would get if you applied the percentage to the wrong value. To find the
right answer, take 30% of 50 by multiplying 0.3 by 50 to get 15; then subtract
that from 50. The corn on the north edge is 35 inches tall. The correct answer
is (C).




READ THE FINAL QUESTION
It’s a bad idea to assume you know what a question is going to
ask you to do. Make sure to always read the final question
before starting to work on the question. Write key words or the
entire final question on the scratch paper. Then, try to ballpark
before you solve.




  2.      Mark for Review
       If 16x – 2 = 30, what is the value of 8x – 4?

          A 12

          B 15

          C 16

          D 28
                 RTFQ:
                 Read
                 The
                 Final
                 Question

                 Get started faster and avoid trap answers by reading
                 and rewriting the actual question being asked.



Here’s How to Crack It
The question asks for the value of an expression, but don’t just dive in and
solve for the variable. First, see if you can eliminate answers by Ballparking,
which can also work on algebra questions. To go from 16x to 8x, you would
just divide by 2. Dividing 30 by 2 gives you 15, so 28 is way too big.
Eliminate it. The correct answer is not likely to be 15, either, because that
ignores the –2 and the –4 in the question.

To solve this one, add 2 to each side of the equation to get 16x = 32. Divide
both sides by 2, which gives you 8x = 16. But don’t stop there! The final
question asks for 8x – 4, so (C) is a trap answer. You have to take the last
step and subtract 4 from both sides to find that 8x – 4 = 12. The correct
answer is (A).




ONE PIECE AT A TIME
When dealing with complicated math questions, take it one little piece at a
time. We call this strategy Bite-Sized Pieces. If you try to do more than one
step at a time, especially if you do it in your head, you are likely to make
mistakes or fall for trap answers. After each step, take a look at
the answer choices and determine whether you can eliminate
any.

Try the following question.




  3.      Mark for Review
       A paper airplane is thrown horizontally from the top of a hill. It travels
       in a straight line, and as it moves forward, it also descends. The plane
       moves horizontally at 9 feet per second while descending one foot for
       every 3 feet traveled horizontally. After 5 seconds of travel, how many
       feet has the plane descended from the height at which it was thrown?

          A3

          B 10

          C 15

          D 20




                  Bite-Sized Pieces:
                  Do one small, manageable piece at a time and keep
                  writing things down.



Here’s How to Crack It
The question asks how many feet the plane has descended after 5 seconds.
There are a few things going on here. The plane is traveling horizontally, and
it is also descending. Start by figuring out how far it travels horizontally. It
moves in that direction at 9 feet per second for 5 seconds, so it moves
horizontally 9 × 5 = 45 feet. It descends 1 foot for every 3 traveled
horizontally. If it goes 45 feet horizontally, it will descend more than 3 feet,
so eliminate (A). Now figure out how many “3 feet” are in 45 feet—for each
one of them, the plane will descend 1 foot. Since 45 ÷ 3 = 15, the plane
descends 15 feet. The correct answer is (C).

You may also have noticed that all the numbers in the question are odd. This
makes it unlikely that the answer would be 10 or 20, which are even. If you
see things like that, use them as opportunities to eliminate.



Here’s another example.




   4.      Mark for Review
                    (5ck 2 + 5c 2 – 2c 2k) – (ck 2 + 2c 2k + 5c 2)
        Which of the following is equivalent to the expression above?

          A 4ck 2

          B 4ck 2 – 4c 2k

          C 5c 2k 4 – 10c 4k

          D 8c 2k 3 + 7c 2k – 5c2


Here’s How to Crack It
The question asks for an expression that is equivalent to the difference of two
polynomials. In math class, your teacher would want you to combine all like
terms and show your work, but this isn’t math class. Start with one tiny piece
of this intimidating question. The first set of parentheses starts with a term
containing ck2. Check the second set of parentheses for the same combination
of variables and exponents. The first term there matches, so the first step to
take is 5ck2 – ck2 = 4ck2. There are no other terms with ck2, so the correct
answer must contain 4ck2. Eliminate (C) and (D). Now you have a fifty-fifty
chance of getting it right, so you can guess and go, or you can do one more
step to determine whether the answer is (A) or (B). The difference between
the two answers is the –4c2k term, so focus on the terms in the expression
that contain c2k. In the first set of parentheses, you have –2c2k, and then you
subtract the 2c2k term in the second set of parentheses to get –2c2k – 2c2k = –
4c2k. The correct answer is (B).



Word Problems
The two strategies we just showed you—RTFQ and Bite-Sized Pieces—are
a large part of the approach to word problems on the Digital SAT. The test-
writers will try to make things difficult to understand by making a story out of
the math. To make sure you have the best shot at reaching the correct answer
quickly and accurately, follow this basic approach.


                       Word Problem Basic Approach

          1. Read the Final Question (RTFQ)—Understand the
             actual question being asked. Write down key words.
          2. Let the answers point the way—Use the answer type to
             help determine how to start working on the question.
          3. Work in bite-sized pieces—Find one piece to start
             with, then work piece-by-piece until the final question
             has been answered.
          4. Use POE—Check to see whether any answers can be
             eliminated after each bite-sized piece.


This approach can be helpful on questions that are “just” math, but they are
vital on word problems. Here are some details about the word problem basic
approach.

RTFQ—The final question will start with something like Which of the
following, What is, or How many. Find the final question (it’s usually at the
end) and write down key words. If the question asks for the value of a
variable or the measure of an angle, write down which variable or which
angle. If it asks for a specific part of a graph or a word problem, write down
which part. Terms and units, such as median, positive, minutes, or miles,
also go on the scratch paper.

Let the answers point the way—On multiple-choice questions, the answer
type often gives a clue about how to approach the question. Do the answers
have numbers? variables? equations? graphs? a bunch of words? Use that
information to get started.

Work in bite-sized pieces—Rather than trying to plan the entire question up
front, just get started. Work the question one bite-sized piece at a time,
reading more along the way and making notes on the scratch paper. The final
question and the answer types usually reveal the best approach. If it’s not
obvious, either mark the question to come back to later or enter your Letter of
the Day.

Use POE—On some questions, it’s possible to eliminate answers along the
way while working in bite-sized pieces. If the question asks about an
equation representing a situation, for example, an answer that gets any piece
of the equation wrong can be eliminated. Eliminate answers that don’t work
when you plug them in, answers that are clearly too big, too small, or have
the wrong sign, and answers that contradict information given in the question.


THE CALCULATOR
You are allowed to use a calculator on every question in the Math section,
although it doesn’t help on every question. You have two calculator options:

    Use the built-in Desmos calculator within the testing app.
    Bring your own approved scientific or graphing calculator.

Whether you use the built-in calculator or your own, practice, practice,
practice! A calculator can make some questions much easier to answer and
will save you time on other questions. To practice with the built-in
calculator, download the Bluebook app or just use the free version on the
Desmos website.

Calculator Guide
Head to your Student Tools to read our Guide for the built-in calculator.
There you will find basic information about opening and using the calculator,
details about how to use the keypads and advanced functions, and
instructions for getting the most out of the graphing calculator. This Guide
also includes a number of questions from your first practice test with detailed
instructions and screenshots to show you how to solve them using the built-in
calculator.

Even if you are planning to use your own calculator, this Guide might help
you think of ways to use it that you hadn’t considered before.

                 Call on the Calculator
                 Practice using the built-in calculator or your own
                 throughout your test preparation. Use it for example
                 questions in this book, use it while taking practice
                 tests, and use it any time you’re doing practice
                 questions for the Digital SAT.
Personal Calculator
If you have a good calculator that you are familiar with and like using, you
may take it with you and use it on the test. Make sure that your calculator is
either a scientific or a graphing calculator and can perform the order of
operations correctly. To test your calculator, try the following problem,
typing it in exactly as written without hitting the ENTER or “=” key until the
end: 3 + 4 × 6 = . The calculator should give you 27. If it gives you 42, it’s
not a good calculator to use.

If you do decide to use you own graphing calculator, keep in mind that it
cannot have a QWERTY-style keyboard (like the TI-95). Most of the
graphing calculators have typing capabilities, but because they don’t have
typewriter-style keyboards, they are perfectly legal. To see the full College
Board calculator policy, visit https://satsuite.collegeboard.org/digital/what-
to-bring-do/calculator-policy.

Also, you cannot use the calculator on your phone. In fact, on test day, you
will have to turn your phone off and put it away.

The only danger in using a calculator on the Digital SAT is that you may be
tempted to use it in situations in which it won’t help you. Some students
believe that their calculator will solve many difficulties they have with math.
This type of thinking may even occasionally cause students to miss a question
they might have otherwise answered correctly on their own. Remember that
your calculator is only as smart as you are. But if you practice and use a little
caution, you will find that your calculator will help you a great deal.

What a Calculator Is Good at Doing
Here’s a list of some of the things a calculator is good for on the Digital SAT:

    arithmetic
    decimals
    fractions
    square roots
    percentages
    graphs (if it is a graphing calculator)

We’ll discuss the calculator’s role in most of these areas in the next few
chapters.

Calculator Arithmetic
Adding, subtracting, multiplying, and dividing integers and decimals is easy
on a calculator. But, you need to be careful when you key in the numbers. A
calculator will give you an incorrect answer to an arithmetic calculation if
you press the wrong keys.

The main thing to remember about a calculator is that it can’t help you find
the answer to a question you don’t understand. If you wouldn’t know how to
solve a particular problem using pencil and paper, you won’t know how to
solve it using a calculator either. Your calculator will help you, but it won’t
take the place of a solid understanding of basic Digital SAT mathematics.

                 Calculators Don’t Think for You
                 A calculator crunches numbers and often saves you
                 a great deal of time and effort, but it is not a
                 substitute for your problem-solving skills.



Use Your Paper First
When you decide to use a calculator to help answer a question, the first step
should be to set up the problem or equation on paper; this will keep you from
getting lost or confused. This is especially important when solving the
problem involves a number of separate steps. The basic idea is to use the
scratch paper to make a plan, and then use your calculator to execute it.

Working on paper first will also give you a record of what you have done if
you change your mind, run into trouble, or lose your place. If you suddenly
find that you need to try a different approach to a question, you may not have
to go all the way back to the beginning. This will also make it easier for you
to check your work, if you have time to do so.

Don’t use the memory function on your calculator (if it has one). Because you
can use your scratch paper, you don’t need to juggle numbers within the
calculator itself. Instead of storing the result of a calculation in the calculator,
write it on your scratch paper, clear your calculator, and move to the next
step of the question. A calculator’s memory is fleeting; scratch paper is
forever.

                  Write Things Down
                  You have scratch paper, so make the most of it.
                  Keep track of your progress through each question
                  by writing down each step.



Order of Operations
In the next chapter, we will discuss the proper order of operations for
solving equations that require several operations to be performed. Be sure
you understand this information, because it applies to calculators as much as
it does to pencil-and-paper computations. You may remember PEMDAS
from school. PEMDAS is the order of operations. You’ll learn more about it
and see how questions on the Digital SAT require you to know the order of
operations. You must always perform calculations in the proper order.

Fractions
Most scientific calculators have buttons that will automatically simplify
fractions or convert fractions from decimals. (For instance, on the TI-81, TI-
83, and TI-84, hitting “Math” and then selecting the first option, “Answer →
Fraction,” will give you the last answer calculated as a fraction in the lowest
terms.) Find out if your calculator has this function! If it does, you can use it
to simplify messy fractions. This function is also very useful when you get an
answer as a decimal, but the answer choices given are all fractions.
                 The Digital SAT Calculator Guide has details about
                 working with fractions, along with other types of
                 math and graphs. Pull up the Guide in your Student
                 Tools and become an expert!



Batteries
Change the batteries on your calculator a week before the Digital SAT so that
you know your calculator won’t run out of power halfway through the test.
You can also take extra batteries with you, just in case. Although it isn’t very
likely that the batteries will run out on your calculator on the day of the test,
it could happen—so you want to be prepared.

Final Words on the Calculator
Remember that the test-writers are trying to test your ability to use your
calculator wisely. As such, they have purposely created many questions in
which the calculator is worthless. So be sure to Read the Final Question—
there may be some serious surprises in there. Practice your math skills and
your calculator skills so you have options about how you solve questions.
Summary
 Look for ways to eliminate answer choices that are too big or too small.
 Ballparking can help you find the right answer without extensive
 calculations, avoid trap answers, and improve your chances of getting
 the question right even if you have to guess.

 Use the built-in tools as much as possible. The most useful ones on the
 Math section are the Calculator, Reference Sheet, and Answer
 Eliminator tool.

 Use your scratch paper constantly: number the work for each question,
 write down key words from the final question, redraw geometric figures,
 and write down every step of math. Even if you use a calculator, it’s
 worth setting up the math on your scratch paper to stay organized and
 avoid mistakes.

 Utilize the Word Problem Basic Approach: Read the Final Question
 (RTFQ), Let the Answers Point the Way, Work in Bite-Sized Pieces, and
 use Process of Elimination (POE).

 Practice with the calculator you plan to use for the test: either the built-in
 Desmos calculator or your personal scientific or graphing calculator.

 If you are going to use the built-in calculator, read the Digital SAT
 Calculator Guide in your Student Tools to maximize its effectiveness.

 If you are going to use your own calculator, make sure it is on the
 approved list and has fresh batteries.

 Set up the question on the scratch paper before entering anything into a
 calculator. By doing so, you will eliminate the possibility of getting lost
 or confused.
A calculator can’t help you find the answer to a question you don’t
understand. Be sure to use your calculator as a tool, not a crutch.

Whether you are using a calculator or not, you must always perform
calculations in the proper order (PEMDAS).
Chapter 20
Fun with Fundamentals
We’ll show you which mathematical concepts are most important to know for
the Digital SAT. However, this book relies on your knowledge of basic math
concepts. If you’re a little rusty, this chapter is for you. Read on for a quick
review of the math fundamentals you’ll need to know.
THE BUILDING BLOCKS
As you go through this book, you might discover that you’re having trouble
with stuff you thought you already knew—like fractions or square roots. If
this happens, it’s probably a good idea to review the fundamentals. That’s
where this chapter comes in. Our drills and examples will refresh your
memory if you’ve gotten rusty. Always keep in mind that the math tested on
the Digital SAT is different from the math taught in school. If you want to
raise your score, don’t waste time studying math that the Digital SAT never
tests.

Keep in mind that calculators are allowed on every question in both Math
modules. You can use the built-in calculator available to you in the testing
app, and you can also bring your own. A calculator can perform many basic
math operations for you, such as working with fractions and converting
between fractions and decimals. However, a calculator only does exactly
what you tell it to do, so read carefully and write things down rather than
relying on a calculator too much. Learn the content in this chapter, but also
practice with the calculator you plan to use on test day. Your brain, pencil,
and calculator all work together to get questions right efficiently.

Let’s talk first about what you should expect to see on the test.

The Instructions
Both of the Math modules on the Digital SAT begin with the same set of
instructions. The clock starts right away, so you want to know the instructions
cold before you go in. That way, you can click Close and start working right
away. If you forget something about the instructions while you’re working on
the test, click the Directions button in the upper left corner. We’ve reprinted
the instructions below. Be sure to familiarize yourself with them ahead of
time.

The questions in this section address a number of important math skills.
Use of a calculator is permitted for all questions. A reference sheet,
calculator, and these directions can be accessed throughout the test.

Unless otherwise indicated:

    All variables and expressions represent real numbers.
    Figures provided are drawn to scale.
    All figures lie in a plane.
    The domain of a given function f is the set of all real numbers x for
    which f(x) is a real number.

For multiple-choice questions, solve each problem and choose the correct
answer from the choices provided. Each multiple-choice question has a
single correct answer.

For student-produced response questions, solve each problem and enter
your answer as described below.

    If you find more than one correct answer, enter only one answer.
    You can enter up to 5 characters for a positive answer and up to 6
    characters (including the negative sign) for a negative answer.
    If your answer is a fraction that doesn’t fit in the provided space, enter
    the decimal equivalent.
    If your answer is a decimal that doesn’t fit in the provided space, enter it
    by truncating or rounding at the fourth digit.

    If your answer is a mixed number (such as 3 ), enter it as an improper

    fraction (7/2) or its decimal equivalent (3.5).

    Don’t enter symbols such as a percent sign, comma, or dollar sign.

                                  Examples
        Answer             Acceptable ways to      Unacceptable: will NOT
                              enter answer             receive credit
                               3.5
                                                         31/2
      3.5                      3.50
                                                         3 1/2
                               7/2

                               2/3
                                                         0.66
                               .6666
                                                         .66
                               .6667
                                                         0.67
                               0.666
                                                         .67
                               0.667

                               –1/3
                                                         –.33
                               –.3333
                                                         –0.33
                               –0.333


The instructions have a lot to say about the fill-in questions. Don’t worry:
we’ll show you everything you need to know about that question format in
Chapter 26.

Standard Symbols
The following standard symbols are used frequently on the Digital SAT:



                 SYMBOL                MEANING
                    =                  is equal to
                    ≠                  is not equal to
                    <                  is less than
                    >                  is greater than
                       ≤                    is less than or equal to
                       ≥                    is greater than or equal to




                 Formulas and Definitions
                 Go to your online Student Tools for a complete list of
                 the math terms and formulas that you’ll need to
                 know for the Digital SAT.



THERE ARE ONLY SIX OPERATIONS
There are only six arithmetic operations that you will ever need to perform
on the Digital SAT:

 1. Addition (3 + 3)
 2. Subtraction (3 – 3)
 3. Multiplication (3 × 3 or 3 • 3)
 4. Division (3 ÷ 3 or 3/3)
 5. Raising to a power (33)
 6. Finding a root ( and )

If you’re like most students, you probably haven’t paid much serious attention
to these topics since junior high school. You’ll need to learn about them again
if you want to do well on the Digital SAT. By the time you take the test, using
them should be automatic. All the arithmetic concepts are fairly basic, but
you’ll have to know them cold. You’ll also have to know when and how to
use your calculator, which will be quite helpful.

What Do You Get?
You should know the following arithmetic terms:
            The result of addition is a sum or total.
            The result of subtraction is a difference.
            The result of multiplication is a product.
            The result of division is a quotient.
            In the expression 52, the 2 is called an exponent.



The Six Operations Must Be Performed in the Proper
Order
Very often, solving an equation on the Digital SAT will require you to
perform several different operations, one after another. These operations
must be performed in the proper order. In general, the questions are written
in such a way that you won’t have trouble deciding what comes first. In cases
in which you are uncertain, you need to remember only the following
sentence:

                     Please Excuse My Dear Aunt Sally;
                        she walks from left to right.

That’s PEMDAS, for short. It stands for Parentheses, Exponents,
Multiplication, Division, Addition, and Subtraction. First, do any
calculations inside the parentheses; then take care of the exponents; then
perform all multiplication and division, from left to right, followed by
addition and subtraction, from left to right.

The following drill will help you learn the order in which to perform the six
operations. First, set up the equations on paper. Then, use your calculator for
the arithmetic. Make sure you perform the operations in the correct order.
                 Do It Yourself
                 The Digital SAT’s built-in calculator follows the order
                 of operations. It will also rewrite division into
                 fractions—pretty neat! However, as with all
                 calculators, the built-in calculator will only calculate
                 exactly what you put in. Furthermore, if you decide
                 to use your own calculator, be sure to practice and
                 use parentheses whenever necessary. Write out the
                 steps on your scratch paper first to avoid entry
                 errors.



DRILL 1
Solve each of the following problems by performing the indicated operations
in the proper order. Answers can be found on this page.

   1. 107 + (109 – 107) =
   2. (7 × 5) + 3 =
   3. 6 – 3(6 – 3) =
   4. 2 × [7 – (6 ÷ 3)] =
   5. 10 – (9 – 8 – 6) =

Parentheses Can Help You Solve Equations
Using parentheses to regroup information in arithmetic problems can be very
helpful. In order to do this, you need to understand a basic law that you have
probably forgotten since the days when you last took arithmetic—the
Distributive Law. You don’t need to remember the name of the law, but you
do need to know how to use it to help you solve problems.
                 Whichever Comes First
                 For addition and subtraction, solve from left to right.
                 The same is true of multiplication and division. And
                 remember: if you don’t solve in order from left to
                 right, you could end up with the wrong answer!
                 Example:
                 24 ÷ 4 × 6 = 24 ÷ 24 = 1
                 wrong
                 24 ÷ 4 × 6 = 6 × 6 = 36
                 right



The Distributive Law
If you’re multiplying the sum of two numbers by a third number, you can
multiply each number in your sum individually. This comes in handy when
you have to multiply the sum of two variables.

If a question gives you information in “factored form”—a(b + c)—then you
should distribute the first variable before you do anything else. If you are
given information that has already been distributed—(ab + ac)—then you
should factor out the common term, putting the information back in factored
form. Very often on the Digital SAT, simply doing this will enable you to spot
the answer.

Here are some examples:

    Distributive: 6(53) + 6(47) = 6(53 + 47) = 6(100) = 600

    Multiplication first: 6(53) + 6(47) = 318 + 282 = 600

You get the same answer each way, so why get involved with complicated
arithmetic? If you use the Distributive Law for this problem, you don’t even
need to use your calculator.

The drill below illustrates the Distributive Law.
DRILL 2
Rewrite each problem by either distributing or factoring and then solve.
(Hint: For questions 1, 2, 4, and 5, try factoring.) Questions 3, 4, and 5 have
no numbers in them; therefore, they can’t be solved with a calculator.
Answers can be found on this page.

   1. (6 × 57) + (6 × 13) =
   2. 51(48) + 51(50) + 51(52) =
   3. a(b + c – d) =
   4. xy – xz =
   5. abc + xyc =


FRACTIONS
A Fraction Is Just Another Way of Expressing Division
The expression    is exactly the same thing as x ÷ y. The expression       means

nothing more than 1 ÷ 2. In the fraction , x is known as the numerator, and

y is known as the denominator.



        Fractions and Calculators
        It can be tempting to try to directly enter the information from
        the question into the calculator. The writers of the Digital
        SAT know this, so they write questions that will lead you to
        errors if you do so. Always start by writing out what you
        need to calculate on your scratch paper; only afterwards
        should you move to use the calculator.

        On the Digital SAT’s built-in calculator, fractions will
        appear as fractions. You can use arrow keys or a mouse to
       navigate between the numerator and denominator of a
       fraction.

       The results will be given as a decimal. To get the results as a
       fraction, click the button next to the entry box that looks like
       this:




Adding and Subtracting Fractions with the Same
Denominator
To add two or more fractions that all have the same denominator, simply add
the numerators and put the sum over the common denominator. Consider the
following example:




Subtraction works exactly the same way:




Adding and Subtracting Fractions with Different
Denominators
In school you were taught to add and subtract fractions with different
denominators by finding the common denominator. To do this, you have to
multiply each fraction by a number that makes all the denominators the same.
Most students find this process annoying.

Fortunately, we have an approach to adding and subtracting fractions with
different denominators that simplifies the entire process. Use the example
below as a model. Just multiply in the direction of each arrow, and then
either add or subtract across the numerator. Lastly, multiply across the
denominator.




We call this procedure the Bowtie because the arrows make it look like a
bowtie. Use the Bowtie to add or subtract any pair of fractions without
thinking about the common denominator, just by following the steps above.


       Call on the Calculator
       Whether you are adding, subtracting, multiplying, or dividing
       fractions, a calculator can make it a snap. Keep the following
       things in mind:

         1. Practice with whichever calculator you plan to use on
            test day.
         2. Follow the order of operations and use parentheses to
            make sure the calculator does exactly what you want.
         3. Learn the rules anyway. You might need them if, for
            example, the fractions include variables.
Multiplying All Fractions
Multiplying fractions is easy. Just multiply across the numerator; then
multiply across the denominator.

Here’s an example.




When you multiply fractions, all you are really doing is performing one
multiplication problem on top of another.

You should never multiply two fractions before looking to see if you can
reduce either or both. If you reduce first, your final answer will be in the
form that the test-writers are looking for. Here’s another way to express this
rule: Simplify before you multiply.




Dividing All Fractions
To divide one fraction by another, flip over (or take the reciprocal of) the
second fraction and multiply.

Here’s an example.
                 Just Flip It
                 Dividing by a fraction is the same thing as
                 multiplying by the reciprocal of that fraction. So just
                 flip over the fraction you are dividing by and multiply
                 instead.


Be careful not to cancel or reduce until after you flip the second fraction. You
can even do the same thing with fractions whose numerators and/or
denominators are fractions. These problems look quite frightening, but
they’re actually easy if you keep your cool.

Here’s an example.
Reducing Fractions
When you add or multiply fractions, you will very often end up with a big
fraction that is hard to work with. You can almost always reduce such a
fraction into one that is easier to handle.

To reduce a fraction, divide both the numerator and the denominator by the

largest number that is a factor of both. For example, to reduce       , divide

both the numerator and the denominator by 12, which is the largest number
that is a factor of both. Dividing 12 by 12 yields 1; dividing 60 by 12 yields
5. The reduced fraction is .


If you can’t immediately find the largest number that is a factor of both, find
any number that is a factor of both and divide both the numerator and
denominator by that number. Your calculations will take a little longer, but

you’ll end up in the same place. In the previous example, even if you don’t
see that 12 is a factor of both 12 and 60, you can no doubt see that 6 is a

factor of both. Dividing numerator and denominator by 6 yields            . Now

divide both numbers by 2. Doing so yields . Once again, you have arrived

at the answer.

Reducing fractions can be pretty easy on a calculator. Using the built-in
calculator, click the button to the left of the entry field that toggles between
fractions and decimals. When in fraction mode, the result will appear in its
most reduced form. Take a look at the same fraction in decimal mode and
fraction mode:




Converting Mixed Numbers to Fractions
A mixed number is a number such as            . It is the sum of an integer and a

fraction. When you see mixed numbers on the Digital SAT, you should
usually convert them to ordinary fractions.



        Here’s a quick and easy way to convert mixed numbers.
            Multiply the integer by the denominator.
            Add this product to the numerator.
            Place this sum over the denominator.
For practice, let’s convert        to a fraction. Multiply 2 (the integer part of the

mixed number) by 4 (the denominator). That gives you 8. Add that to the 3

(the numerator) to get 11. Place 11 over 4 to get           .


The mixed number          is exactly the same as the fraction             . We converted

the mixed number to a fraction because fractions are easier to work with than

mixed numbers.


                 Just Don’t Mix
                 For some reason, the test-writers think it’s okay to
                 give you mixed numbers as answer choices. On fill-
                 in questions, however, if you use a mixed number,
                 you won’t get credit. You can see why. In your fill-in

                 box,      will look like   . See Chapter 26 for more

                 about fill-in questions.




DRILL 3
Try converting the following mixed numbers to fractions. Answers can be
found on this page.

   1.


   2.


   3.
   4.


   5.


Fractions Behave in Peculiar Ways
Fractions don’t always behave the way you might want them to. For example,
because 4 is obviously greater than 2, it’s easy to forget that   is less than .

It’s particularly confusing when the numerator is something other than 1. For

example,     is less than . Finally, you should keep in mind that when you

multiply one fraction by another, you’ll get a fraction that is smaller than
either of the first two. Study the following example:




A Final Word About Fractions and Calculators
Throughout this section, we’ve given you some hints about using a calculator
to work with fractions. The built-in calculator or your own can be a
tremendous help if you know how to use it properly. Make sure you practice
with the calculator you plan to use on test day so that working fractions on it
becomes second nature before the test.


DRILL 4
Work these examples with the techniques you’ve read about in this chapter so
far. Then work them again using a calculator. If you have any problems, go
back and review the information just outlined. Answers can be found on this
page.

   1. Reduce


   2. Convert    to a fraction.


   3.


   4.


   5.



   6.




   7.




DECIMALS
A Decimal Is Just Another Way of Expressing a
Fraction
Fractions can be expressed as decimals. To find a fraction’s decimal
equivalent, simply divide the numerator by the denominator. (You can do this
easily with a calculator.)

                                      =

                                3 ÷ 5 = 0.6

Adding, Subtracting, Multiplying, and Dividing
Decimals
Manipulating decimals is easy with a calculator. Simply punch in the
numbers—being especially careful to get the decimal point in the right place
every single time—and read the result from the display. A calculator makes
these operations easy. In fact, working with decimals is one area on the
Digital SAT in which your calculator will prevent you from making careless
errors. You won’t have to line up decimal points or remember what happens
when you divide. The calculator will keep track of everything for you, as
long as you punch in the correct numbers to begin with. Just be sure to
practice carefully before test day.


DRILL 5
Calculate each of the answers to the following questions on paper with your
pencil, rounding any awkward numbers to make the math easier to handle.
Sometimes, estimating the answer is all you need to do to answer a multiple-
choice question. Then use a calculator to find the exact answer. Answers can
be found on this page.

   1. 0.43 × 0.87 =

   2.

   3. 3.72 ÷ 0.02 =

   4. 0.71 – 3.6 =
EXPONENTS AND SQUARE ROOTS
Exponents Are a Kind of Shorthand
Many numbers are the product of the same value multiplied over and over
again. For example, 32 = 2 × 2 × 2 × 2 × 2. Another way to write this would
be 32 = 25, or “thirty-two equals two to the fifth power.” The little number,
or exponent, denotes the number of times that 2 is to be used as a factor. In
the same way, 103 = 10 × 10 × 10, or 1,000, or “ten to the third power,” or
“ten cubed.” In this example, the 10 is called the base and the 3 is called the
exponent. (You won’t need to know these terms on the Digital SAT, but you
will need to know them in order to understand our explanations.)

                 Warning #1
                 The rules for multiplying and dividing exponents do
                 not apply to addition or subtraction:
                 22 + 23 = 12
                 (2 × 2) + (2 × 2 × 2) = 12
                 It does not equal 25 or 32.


Multiplying Numbers with Exponents
To multiply two numbers with the same base, simply add the exponents. For
example, 23 × 25 = 23+5 = 28.

Dividing Numbers with Exponents
To divide two numbers with the same base, simply subtract the exponents.

For example,                  .


Raising a Power to a Power
When you raise a power to a power, you multiply the exponents. For
example, (23)4 = 23 × 4 = 212.
                  Warning #2
                  Parentheses are very important with exponents
                  because you must remember to distribute powers to
                  everything within them.

                  For example, (3x)2 = 9x 2 , not 3x 2 . Similarly,

                             , not   .


                  But the Distributive Law applies only when you
                  multiply or divide:

                  (x + y)2 = x 2 + 2xy + y 2 , not x 2 + y 2 .


MADSPM
To remember the exponent rules, all you need to do is remember the acronym
MADSPM. Here’s what it stands for:

    Multiply → Add

    Divide → Subtract

    Power → Multiply

Whenever you see an exponent question, you should think MADSPM. The
three MADSPM rules are the only rules that apply to exponent operations.

Here’s a typical Digital SAT exponent question.




  1.      Mark for Review

       For the equations                 and                 , if a > 1, what is the value

       of x?
         A5

         B 10

         C 15

         D 20


Here’s How to Crack It
The question asks for the value of x, but it looks pretty intimidating with all
those variables. In fact, you might be about to cry “POOD” and go on to the
next question. That might not be a bad idea, but before you skip the question,
pull out those MADSPM rules.

For the first equation, you can use the Divide-Subtract Rule:

. In other words, the first equation tells you that x – y = 10.

For the second equation, you can use the Power-Multiply Rule:

                  . So, that means that 3y = x.

Now, it’s time to substitute: x − y = 3y − y = 10. So, 2y = 10 and y = 5. Be
careful, though! Don’t choose (A). That’s the value of y, but the question
wants to know the value of x. Since x = 3y, x = 3(5) = 15. The correct
answer is (C).



        Exponents and Your Calculator
        The built-in calculator has both an a2 button (for squaring a
        value) and an ab button (for other exponents). As with
        fractions, the built-in calculator shows you the operations in
        the same way you’d write them out on paper.
You could also do this question by using Plugging In the Answers, or PITA,
which will be discussed in more detail later in this book. Of course, you still
need to know the MADSPM rules to do the question that way.

The Peculiar Behavior of Exponents
Raising a number to a power can have quite peculiar and unexpected results,
depending on what sort of number you start out with. Here are some
examples.

    If you square or cube a number greater than 1, it becomes larger. For
    example, 23 = 8.

    If you square or cube a positive fraction smaller than one, it becomes
    smaller.

    For example,              .


    A negative number raised to an even power becomes positive. For
    example, (–2)2 = 4.

    A negative number raised to an odd power remains negative. For
    example, (–2)3 = –8.

                 See the Trap
                 The test-writers may hope you won’t know these
                 strange facts about exponents and throw them in as
                 trap answers. Knowing the peculiar behavior of
                 exponents will help you avoid these tricky pitfalls in a
                 question.
You should also have a feel for relative sizes of exponential numbers without
calculating them. For example, 210 is much larger than 102 (210 = 1,024; 102
= 100). To take another example, 25 is twice as large as 24, even though 5
seems only a bit larger than 4.

Square Roots
The radical sign (    ) indicates the square root of a number. For example,
        . Note that square roots cannot be negative. If the test-writers want

you to think about a negative solution, they won’t use the radical sign; instead
they’ll say x2 = 25 because then x = 5 or x = –5.

The Only Rules You Need to Know
Here are the only rules regarding square roots that you need to know for the
Digital SAT.

  1.              . For example,                    .


  2.           . For example,                  .


  3.    = positive root only. For example,              .

Note that rule 1 works in reverse:                             . This is really a
kind of factoring. You are using rule 1 to factor a large, clumsy radical into

numbers that are easier to work with. Rule 2 works in reverse as well.

divided by      looks complicated, but         =            . And remember that

radicals are just fractional exponents, so the same rules of distribution apply.

We’ll get to fractional exponents below.
Careless Errors
The Digital SAT will try to confuse you with the behavior of roots.
Remember that the square root of a number between 0 and 1 is larger than

the original number. For example,           , and     .


Negative and Fractional Exponents
So far we’ve dealt with only positive integers for exponents, but they can be
negative integers as well as fractions. The same concepts and rules apply, but
the numbers just look a little weirder. Keep these concepts in mind:

    Negative exponents are a fancy way of writing reciprocals:

                                    x–n =

    Fractional exponents are a fancy way of taking roots and powers:




       Roots and the Calculator
       The Digital SAT’s built-in calculator has a button for square
       roots right on the main ABC keypad. The calculator can do
       other roots, but College Board has hidden that function. Click

       the “funcs” button and scroll all the way down to the
       “NUMBER THEORY” section. There you’ll find the
       button. As with other functions on the built-in calculator, both

       radicals will look the same as they would if you wrote them
         out yourself on paper.

         If you don’t want to scroll through a menu, you can also use
         fractional exponents using the ab button to do roots other than
         square roots, as well.


Here’s an example.




  2.      Mark for Review

       If x > 0, which of the following is equivalent to   ?

         I.

         II.

         III.

          A None

          B I and II only

          C II and III only

          D I, II, and III


Here’s How to Crack It
The question asks for an equivalent form of a root and gives three
expressions with exponents, so it really tests your knowledge of exponents.
First, convert     into an exponent to more easily compare it to the choices
in the Roman numeral statements. (Plus, exponents are easier to work with
because they have those nice MADSPM rules.) According to the definition of

a fractional exponent,           . You want the items in the Roman numerals

to equal   .


Now, it’s time to start working with the Roman numerals. In (I), the test-
writers are trying to be tricky. (There’s a surprise.) There’s no exponent rule

for adding exponent expressions with like bases. So,           does not equal

  . (If you want to be sure, you could try a number for x: if x = 4, then

       , but                   .) So, cross off any answer that includes (I):
(B) and (D) are gone.

Now, since you are down to either (A) or (C), all you really need to do is try
either (II) or (III). If either one works, the answer is (C). Try (II). Use the


Power-Multiply Rule:                           . Since (II) works, (C) is the

correct answer.

Notice that you didn’t even need to check (III). Using POE on a Roman
numeral question often means that you won’t need to check all of the Roman
numerals.
HOW TO READ CHARTS AND GRAPHS
Another basic math skill you will need for the Digital SAT is the ability to
interpret data from charts, graphs, tables, and more. This section will cover
the basics of reading these figures. How to answer questions related to charts
and other figures in detail will be discussed in Chapter 24.

What’s Up with All of These Figures?
The Digital SAT includes charts, graphs, and tables throughout the test to
present data for students to analyze. College Board believes this will better
reflect what students learn in school and what they need to understand in the
real world. Questions will typically include real-life scenarios, such as
finance and business situations, social science issues, and scientific matters.

Since you’ll be seeing graphics throughout the test, let’s look at the types you
may encounter and the skills you’ll need to work with to analyze charts and
graphs.

Types of Graphs

The Scatterplot
A scatterplot is a graph with distinct data points, each representing one
piece of information. On the scatterplot below, each dot represents the
number of televisions sold at a certain price point.
Here’s How to Read It
To find the cost of a television when 225 televisions are sold, start at 225 on
the vertical axis and look to the right until you hit a data point. Use the edge
of your scratch paper as a ruler or, if you have a steady hand, drag the mouse
pointer. Once you hit a point, visualize (again using your scratch paper or the
mouse pointer to help) a straight line down from the point to the horizontal
axis and read the number the line hits, which should be $1,500. To determine
the number of televisions sold when they cost a certain amount, reverse the
steps—start at the bottom, look up until you hit a point, and then look left
until you intersect the vertical axis.

Now try a question based on that scatterplot.




   3.      Mark for Review
        A certain store sells televisions ranging in price from $500 to $5,000
        in increments of $500. The graph above shows the total number of
        televisions sold at each price during the last 12 months. Approximately
        how much more revenue did the store collect from the televisions it
     sold priced at $3,500 than it did from the televisions it sold priced at
     $1,000?

        A $175,000

        B $250,000

        C $275,000

        D $350,000


Here’s How to Crack It
The question asks for the difference in revenue from selling televisions at
two different prices. The revenue is the cost of television × number of
televisions sold. You need the information from the graph only for the
television that costs $3,500 and for the television that costs $1,000 in order
to determine how much more revenue the $3,500 television produced. There
were 150 of the $3,500 televisions sold, for a revenue of $525,000. There
were 250 of the $1,000 televisions sold, for a revenue of $250,000. The
difference between the two is $525,000 – $250,000 = $275,000. The correct
answer is (C).



A scatterplot may also include a line of best fit. This is the line that best
represents the data.

The Line Graph
A line graph is similar to a scatterplot in that it shows different data points
that relate the two variables. The difference with a line graph, though, is that
the points have been connected to create a continuous line.
Here’s How to Read It
Reading a line graph is very similar to reading a scatterplot. Start at the axis
that represents the data given, and use scratch paper or the mouse pointer to
visualize a straight line up or to the right until you intersect the graph line.
Then move left or down until you hit the other axis. For example, in
February, indicated by an F on the horizontal axis, there were $2.5 million in
sales. Be sure to notice the units on each axis. If February sales were only
$2.50, rather than $2.5 million, then this company wouldn’t be doing very
well!

Let’s look at a question about this line graph.




   4.      Mark for Review
        The forecasted monthly sales of sunscreen are presented in the figure
        above. For which period are the forecasted monthly sales figures
        strictly decreasing and then strictly increasing?

          A January to March

          B February to April
        C June to August

        D September to November


Here’s How to Crack It
The question asks for a period during which the forecasted sales are
decreasing and then increasing. Look up the values for each period in
question and use Process of Elimination to get rid of those that don’t fit. For
(A), January sales are forecasted to be $2 million, February $2.5 million,
and March $2 million. This is an increase followed by a decrease, not the
other way around, so eliminate (A). For (B), you already know sales
decreased from February to March, so check for a following increase in
April. The figure for April is $3.5 million, which is an increase over the
March figure. The correct answer is (B).



The Bar Graph (or Histogram)
Instead of showing a variety of different data points, a bar graph shows the
number of items that belong to a particular category. If the variable at the
bottom is given in ranges instead of distinct items, the graph is called a
histogram, but you read it the same way.




Here’s How to Read It
The height of each bar corresponds to a value on the vertical axis. In this
case, the bar above Chile hits the line that intersects with 15 on the vertical
axis, so there are 15 million people in Chile. Again, watch the units to make
sure you know what the numbers on the axes represent. On this graph,
horizontal lines are drawn at 5-unit intervals, making the graph easier to
read. If these lines do not appear on a bar graph, use your scratch paper to
determine the height of a given bar.

Here’s an example of a bar graph question, which is based on the
Populations of Countries graph above.




  5.      Mark for Review

       The populations of five countries are shown in the graph above. If

       population density is defined as           , and the area of Paraguay is
       400,000 square kilometers, what is the population density of Paraguay,
       in people per square kilometer?

         A 0.08

         B 0.8

         C 1.25

         D 12.5


Here’s How to Crack It
The question asks for the population density of Paraguay. Start by
determining the population of Paraguay. The bar hits right at the horizontal
line for 5, which is in millions, so there are 5 million people in Paraguay.
Now use the definition of population density in the question.




Be very careful with the number of zeroes you put in the fraction—the
answer choices are pairs that vary by a factor of 10, meaning the test-writers
expect you to miss a zero. The answer must be greater than 1, since your
numerator is bigger than your denominator, so eliminate (A) and (B). Choice
(C) also seems too small, but check the math on your calculator (carefully).
You should get 12.5 people per square kilometer. The correct answer is (D).



The Two-Way Table
A two-way table is another way to represent data without actually graphing
it. Instead of having the variables represented on the vertical and horizontal
axes, the data will be arranged in rows and columns. The top row will give
the headings for each column, and the left-most column will give the headings
for each row. The numbers in each box indicate the data for the category
represented by the row and the column the box is in. This two-way table, for
example, shows computer production arranged by days of the week and shift
times.

                               Morning Shift     Afternoon Shift
            Monday                  200                375
            Tuesday                 245                330
            Wednesday               255                340
            Thursday                250                315
            Friday                  225                360
Here’s How to Read It
If you want to find the number of computers produced on Tuesday morning,
you can start in the Morning Shift column and look down until you find the
number in the row that says Tuesday, or you can start in the row for Tuesday
and look to the right until you find the Morning Shift column. Either way, the
result is 245. Some tables will give you totals in the bottom row and/or the
right-most column, but sometimes you will need to find the totals yourself by
adding up all the numbers in each row or in each column. More complicated
tables will have more categories listed in rows and/or columns, or the tables
may even contain extraneous information.

Give this one a try.




   6.      Mark for Review

                                  Morning Shift     Afternoon Shift
              Monday                   200                375
              Tuesday                  245                330
              Wednesday                255                340
              Thursday                 250                315
              Friday                   225                360

        Computer production at a factory occurs during two shifts, as shown in
        the chart above. If computers are produced only during the morning and
        afternoon shifts, on which of the following pairs of days is the greatest
        total number of computers produced?

          A Monday and Thursday

          B Tuesday and Thursday
        C Wednesday and Friday

        D Tuesday and Friday


Here’s How to Crack It
The question asks for the pair of days on which the greatest number of
computers was produced. This is a perfect calculator question. Just add the
Morning Shift and the Afternoon Shift for each day to see which total is the
greatest. Write each day and total on your scratch paper, so you don’t have to
keep track of it all in your head. Monday is 200 + 375 = 575, Tuesday is 245
+ 330 = 575, Wednesday is 255 + 340 = 595, Thursday is 250 + 315 = 565,
and Friday is 225 + 360 = 585. According to these calculations, Wednesday
and Friday have the two greatest totals, so the greatest number of computers
is produced on those two days together. The correct answer is (C).



Figure Facts
Every time you encounter a figure or graphic on the Digital SAT, you should
make sure you understand how to read it by checking the following:



            What are the variables for each axis or the headings for
            the table?
            What units are used for each variable?
            Are there any key pieces of information (numbers, for
            example) in the legend of the chart that you should note?
            What type of relationship is shown by the data in the
            chart? For instance, if the chart includes curves that
            show an upward slope, then the graph shows a positive
            association, while curves that show a downward slope
            show a negative association.
            You can use the edge of your scratch paper as a ruler to
            help you make sure you are locating the correct data in
            the graph. The mouse pointer on the screen can also help,
            as long as you trust yourself to move it in a straight line.



Surveys on the Digital SAT
Some Digital SAT math questions will appear to be about data, but there’s no
figure and the question has a lot of words about survey results. These
questions are usually about a biased sample, meaning that the group doing the
survey asked people who are likely to already be in favor of or opposed to
the issue, but then drew a conclusion about a larger group. For example, we
couldn’t survey people who read this book to ask whether they read the final
question and take bite-sized pieces and then assume that everyone who takes
the Digital SAT does the same thing.

The best way to perform a survey is to ask a random sample rather than
asking a group that’s probably already picked a side. Questions about
surveys might include numbers, and there’s a chance that there is a problem
with the sample size, meaning the survey asked too few people to get an
accurate result. But usually the number is a distraction, so focus on using
POE and crossing out answers that don’t fit the information given in the
question.
Fundamentals Drill
Work these questions using the skills you’ve learned so far. Be sure to use a
calculator when necessary to avoid careless calculation errors. Don’t forget,
though, that using it may slow you down when doing the math on paper would
be faster. Answers and explanations can be found starting on this page.

  1.      Mark for Review
       If 7 times a number is 84, what is 4 times the number?

          A 16

          B 28

          C 48

          D 56


  2.      Mark for Review

       If 3x = 12, what is the value of   ?

          A


          B

          C4

          D6


  3.      Mark for Review
     Which of the following represents the statement “the sum of the squares
     of x and y is equal to the square root of the difference of x and y”?

        A

        B

        C

        D


4.      Mark for Review
     If a = –2, then a + a2 – a3 + a4 – a5 =




5.      Mark for Review
     Which of the following graphs shows a strong positive association
     between x and y?
6.        Mark for Review

     If          , what is the value of x?

          A1

          B2

          C4

          D6
7.        Mark for Review

     If             , what is the value of x?

          A4

          B 16

          C 32

          D 256


8.        Mark for Review




     In the equation above, if a and b are positive integers and     is in its

     simplest reduced form, what is the value of a?

          A2

          B9

          C 18

          D 40


9.        Mark for Review
     If 4x · n2 = 4x + 1 · n and x and n are both positive integers, what is the
     value of n?
CHAPTER DRILL ANSWERS AND
EXPLANATIONS
Drill 1
1.        109

2.        38

3.        –3

4.        10

5.        15

Drill 2
1.        6(57 + 13) = 6 × 70 = 420

2.        51(48 + 50 + 52) = 51(150) = 7,650

3.        ab + ac – ad

4.        x(y – z)

5.        c(ab + xy)

Drill 3
     1.


     2.


     3.
  4.


  5.


Drill 4
  1. 3

  2.


  3.


  4.


  5.


  6.


  7.


Drill 5
         Estimated Answer   Calculator Answer

   1. 1. 0.4 × 0.9 = 0.36   0.3741

   2. 44 ÷ 0.03 = 1,466     1,457.7

   3. 3.7 ÷ 0.02 = 185      186

   4. 0.7 – 3.6 = –2.9      –2.89
Fundamentals Drill
1.   C

     The question asks for the value of 4 times an unknown number.
     Translate the English into math, calling the number n, to get 7n = 84.
     Divide both sides by 7 to get n = 12. Finally, 4n = 4(12) = 48. The
     correct answer is (C).

2.   D

     The question asks for the value of    . First, solve for x. Divide both

     sides of the equation by 3, and you get x = 4. Then divide 24 by 4,

     which gives you 6. The correct answer is (D).

3.   A

     The question asks for an algebraic expression. Translate the English
     into math by taking it one phrase at a time. “Sum” means you will add
     two things. The “squares of x and y” means to square x and square y, or
     x2 and y2. Add these to get x2 + y2. Cross out any choice that does not
     have x2 + y2 as the first part of the equation. Eliminate (B), (C), and
     (D). The correct answer is (A).

4.   58

     The question asks for the value of an expression for a certain value of
     the variable. Plug in the number given for a in the expression to find the
     value: –2 + (–2)2 – (–2)3 + (–2)4 – (–2)5. Remember PEMDAS, the
     order of operations. The first thing to do here is deal with the
     Exponents, then take care of the Addition and Subtraction: –2 + 4 – (–
     8) + 16 – (–32), which simplifies to –2 + 4 + 8 + 16 + 32 = 58. The
     correct answer is 58.
5.   D

     The question asks for the graph that shows a strong positive association
     between x and y. A “strong positive association” means that as one
     variable increases, the other one increases. This will be shown as a
     line that angles through the graph from the lower left to the upper right.
     These scatterplots don’t have any lines of best fit drawn on them, so
     imagine the line that would go through most of the points on each graph.
     In (A), the points are all over the place, so no line of best fit can even
     be drawn. Eliminate (A). In (B), the line that hits most of the points
     would go from the upper left to the lower right. This is a negative
     association, not a positive one, so eliminate (B). In (C), the line would
     go straight across, parallel to the x-axis. This is not a positive
     association, so eliminate (C). The correct answer is (D).

6.   C

     The question asks for the value of x in an equation with exponents. A
     negative exponent means to take the reciprocal and apply the positive

     exponent. So                 . Now find what power of                .

     Because 34 = 81,            , and x must be 4. The correct answer is (C).

7.   D

     The question asks for the value of x. To solve this equation, get   by
     itself by subtracting 22 from both sides. The result is    = 16, so
     square both sides: ( )2 = 162, so x = 256. The correct answer is (D).

8.   B
     The question asks for the value of a in an equation with fractions. The
     lowest number that both 8 and 10 are factors of is 40. Convert the

     fractions to a denominator of 40:      +    =     . There is no factor that

     9 and 40 have in common, so the fraction cannot be reduced. The

     number in place of a in    is 9. Be careful not to choose (D), which

     contains the value of b. The correct answer is (B).

9.   4

     The question asks for the value of n. First, simplify the equation 4x • n2
     = 4x+1 • n by dividing both sides by n to get 4x • n = 4x+1, and then try
     an easy number for x. If x = 2, then 42 • n = 42+1. Since 16n = 43, 16n =

     64 and n = 4. The correct answer is 4.
Summary
 There are only six arithmetic operations tested on the Digital SAT:
 addition, subtraction, multiplication, division, exponents, and square
 roots.

 These operations must be performed in the proper order (PEMDAS),
 beginning with operations inside parentheses.

 Apply the Distributive Law whenever possible. This is often enough to
 find the answer.

 A fraction is just another way of expressing division.

 You must know how to add, subtract, multiply, and divide fractions.
 Don’t forget that you can also use your calculator or the built-in
 calculator on all questions.

 If any questions involving large or confusing fractions appear, try to
 reduce the fractions first. Before you multiply two fractions, for
 example, see if it’s possible to reduce either or both of the fractions.

 If you know how to work out fractions on your calculator or the built-in
 calculator, use it to help you with questions that involve fractions. If you
 intend to use your calculator for fractions, be sure to practice. You
 should also know how to work with fractions the old-fashioned way
 with paper and pencil.

 A decimal is just another way of expressing a fraction.

 Use your calculator or the built-in calculator to add, subtract, multiply,
 and divide decimals.
Exponents are a kind of shorthand for expressing numbers that are the
product of the same factor multiplied over and over again.

To multiply two exponential expressions with the same base, add the
exponents.

To divide two exponential expressions with the same base, subtract the
exponents.

To raise one exponential expression to another power, multiply the
exponents.

To remember the exponent rules, think MADSPM.

When you raise a positive number greater than 1 to a power greater than
1, the result is larger. When you raise a positive fraction less than 1 to an
exponent greater than 1, the result is smaller. A negative number raised
to an even power becomes positive. A negative number raised to an odd
power remains negative.

When you’re asked for the square root of any number,        , you’re being
asked for the positive root only.

Here are the only rules regarding square roots that you need to know for
the Digital SAT:




The rule for fractional exponents is this:
The rule for negative exponents is this:




When you encounter questions with charts, carefully check the chart for
important information. Remember that you can use your scratch paper or
the mouse pointer to help yourself locate the information.
Chapter 21
Algebra: Cracking the System
In the last chapter, we reviewed some fundamental math concepts featured on
the Digital SAT. Many questions raise the difficulty by replacing numbers
with variables, or letters that stand for unknown quantities. This chapter
covers multiple ways to answer algebra questions, while the next chapter
provides some ways to turn algebra questions back into arithmetic.
DIGITAL SAT ALGEBRA: CRACKING THE
SYSTEM
The Digital SAT generally tests algebra concepts that you most likely learned
in eighth or ninth grade. So, you are probably pretty familiar with the level of
algebra on the test. However, the test-writers are fairly adept at wording
algebra questions in a way that is confusing or distracting in order to make
the questions more difficult than the mathematical concepts that are being
tested.

In this way, the Digital SAT Math section is not only a test of your math
skills, but also, and possibly even more important to your score
improvement, your reading skills. It is imperative that you read the questions
carefully and translate the words in the question into mathematical symbols.

                                           MATH
            ENGLISH
                                           EQUIVALENTS
            is, are, were, did, does,      =
            costs
            what (or any unknown           any variable (x, y, n)
            value)
            more, sum                      +
            less, difference               –
            of, times, product             × (multiply)
            ratio, quotient, out of, per   ÷



        A Little Terminology
        Here are some words that you will need to know to
        understand the explanations in this chapter. These words may
        even show up in the text of a question, so make sure you are
        familiar with them.

        Term: An equation is like a sentence, and a term is the
        equivalent of a word. It can be just a number, just a variable,
        or a number multiplied by a variable. For example, 18, –2x,
        and 5y are the terms in the equation 18 – 2x = 5y.

        Expression: If an equation is like a sentence, then an
        expression is like a phrase or a clause. An expression is a
        combination of terms and mathematical operations with no
        equals or inequality sign. For example, 9 × 2 + 3x is an
        expression.

        Polynomial: A polynomial is any expression containing two
        or more terms. Binomials and trinomials are both examples
        of polynomials. Binomials have two terms, and trinomials
        have three terms.



FUNDAMENTALS OF DIGITAL SAT ALGEBRA
Many questions on the Digital SAT require you to work with variables and
equations. In your math classes, you probably learned to solve equations by
“solving for x” or “solving for y.” To do this, you isolate x or y on one side
of the equals sign and put everything else on the other side. The good thing
about equations is that to isolate the variable you can do anything you want to
them—add, subtract, multiply, divide, square—provided you perform the
same operation to both sides of the equation.

Thus, the golden rule of equations:
         Whatever you do to the terms on one side of the equals sign,
         you must do to the terms on the other side of it as well.


Let’s look at a simple example of this rule, without the distraction of answer
choices.

Problem: If 2x – 15 = 35, what is the value of x?

Solution: The question asks for the value of x, so you want to isolate the
variable. First, add 15 to each side of the equation. Now you have the
following:

                                     2x = 50

Divide each side of the equation by 2. Thus, x equals 25.

The skills for algebraic manipulation work just as well for more complex
equations. The following question is another example of the way the Digital
SAT may ask you to manipulate equations. Don’t panic when you see a
question like this; just use the skills you already have and work carefully so
you don’t make an avoidable mistake in your algebra.




  1.      Mark for Review

       The wave velocity of a vibrating string can be determined using the

       formula         , where T is the tension of the string, m is the mass of

       the string, and L is the length of the string. Which of the following
       expresses the length of the string in terms of v, T, and m?
         A


         B


         C


         D


                 Find the Math
                 Word problems on the Digital SAT are full of, well,
                 words. To stay focused on the math, always read
                 the final question, work in bite-sized pieces, and use
                 your scratch paper to write down important
                 information. If there are words that don’t help you
                 work the problem—such as the explanation of the
                 variables in this question—ignore them.



Here’s How to Crack It
The question asks for an equation that expresses the length of a string, which
is represented by L, so the goal is to get L by itself. Anything you do to one
side of the equation, you must also do to the other side of the equation. Start
by squaring both sides of the equation to get rid of the square root on the right
side.

The equation becomes




Next, multiply both sides by       to get the fraction out of the denominator.
To finish isolating L, multiple both sides by L to get

                                    v2m = TL

Now divide both sides by T to get L by itself.




The correct answer is (B).




SOLVING RADICAL EQUATIONS
Radical equations are just what the name suggests: an equation with a radical
( ) in it. Not to worry, just remember to get rid of the radical first by
raising both sides to that power.

Here’s an example.




   2.        Mark for Review
        If              , what is the value of x?

             A

             B

             C5

             D 25
Here’s How to Crack It
The question asks for the value of x, so start by adding 24 to both sides to get
7    = 35. Now, divide both sides by 7 to find that        = 5. Finally, square
both sides to find that x = 25. The correct answer is (D).




SOLVING RATIONAL EQUATIONS
The built-in calculator or a calculator you bring with you can help on a lot of
algebra questions. However, there are times when you will need to solve an
equation algebraically by hand. Even when the calculator might help, you
may find it more efficient to use your mathematical skills to answer a
question. When a question asks you to solve for an expression, algebraic
manipulation will often be the best way to answer the question.

Here’s an example.




   3.        Mark for Review

        If           , what is the value of ?

             A


             B

             C2

             D3


Here’s How to Crack It
The question asks for the value of . Cross-multiply to get 18r = 3(r + 10) or
18r = 3r + 30. Subtracting 3r from both sides gives you 15r = 30, so r = 2.
Finally,     = . The correct answer is (A).




Extraneous Solutions
Sometimes solving an equation with a rational or radical expression makes
funny things happen. Look at the following example.




   4.      Mark for Review


        Which of the following contains all possible solutions to the equation
        above?

           A 0, 5

           B 0, 4, 5

           C0

           D5

                    Extra Answers
                    Any time you are solving for a variable, make sure
                    your solutions actually work. If they do not, they are
                    extraneous, or extra.



Here’s How to Crack It
The question asks for the solution set to the equation, so solve it for t. Start
by squaring both sides of the equation to get rid of the radical. The equation
becomes

                                 t + 4 = (t – 2)2

Use FOIL (First, Outer, Inner, Last) to multiply the right side of the equation
to get t2 – 2t – 2t + 4 or t2 – 4t + 4. Now the equation is

                               t + 4 = t2 – 4t + 4

Subtract t and 4 from both sides to get

                                   0 = t2 – 5t

The right side factors to t(t – 5), so t = 0 or 5. Eliminate (B), since 4 is not a
solution at all, extraneous or otherwise. Now plug 0 and 5 back into the
original equation to see if they work. If both do, the answer is (A). If one of
them does not, that one is an extraneous solution.




Since the equation is false when t = 0, eliminate (A) and (C). The correct
answer is (D).




SOLVING FOR EXPRESSIONS
Some algebra questions on the Digital SAT ask you to find the value of an
expression rather than the value of a variable. In most cases, you can find the
value of the expression without finding the value of the variable.




  5.      Mark for Review
       If 4x + 2 = 4, what is the value 4x – 6?

          A –6

          B –4

          C4

          D8


Here’s How to Crack It
The question asks for the value of an expression. This is where reading the
final question (RTFQ) can save time. Since the question doesn’t ask for the
value of x, there may be a shortcut. The term 4x is in both expressions, so
instead of solving for x, you can solve for 4x. Subtract 2 from both sides of
4x + 2 = 4 to get 4x = 2. Now, plug 4x = 2 into 4x – 6 to get (2) – 6 = –4. The
correct answer is (B).

This approach will save you time—provided that you see it quickly. So,
while you practice, you should train yourself to look for these sorts of direct
solutions whenever you are asked to solve for the value of an expression.



Here’s another example.




  6.      Mark for Review
     If            , what is the value of       ?

          A

          B

          C5

          D 25


Here’s How to Crack It
The question asks for the value of an expression. If you were to attempt the
math class way, you’d find that               and then you would have to
substitute that into the provided expression. There’s got to be an easier way!

The question is much easier if you read the final question and look for a

direct solution. Then, you notice that all the question wants you to do is to
square the expression on the right of the equals sign. Well, if you square the

expression on the right, then you’d better square the expression on the left

too. Therefore,                   , and the correct answer is (C). That was
pretty painless by comparison.




SOLVING SYSTEMS OF EQUATIONS
Some Digital SAT questions will give you two or more equations involving
two or more variables and ask for the value of an expression or one of the
variables. These questions are very similar to the questions containing one
variable. The test-writers would like you to spend extra time trying to solve
for the value of each variable, but that is not always necessary.
Here’s an example of this type of question as a fill-in. We’ll look at fill-ins in
more detail in Chapter 26.




   7.      Mark for Review
        If 4x + y = 14 and 3x + 2y = 13, what is the value of x – y = ?




                                 Watch Us Crack It



Here’s How to Crack It
The question asks for the value of an expression. You’ve been given two
equations here. But read the final question: instead being asked to solve for a
variable (x or y), you’ve been asked to solve for x – y. Why? Because there
must be a direct solution.

Rather than solving for one variable and then substituting it to solve for the
other variable, see if there’s a faster way. Try stacking the two equations on
top of each other and then adding or subtracting the two equations. There’s a
good chance that this shortcut will take you right to the answer. Let’s try it.

Adding the two equations gives you this:
Unfortunately, that doesn’t get you anywhere, so try subtracting:




When you subtract equations, just change the signs of the second equation and
add. So the equation above becomes




The value of (x – y) is precisely what you are looking for. The correct
answer is 1.



Solving for Variables in Systems of Equations
Shortcuts are awesome, so take them whenever you can on the Digital SAT.
But occasionally, you won’t have the option of using a shortcut with a system
of equations, so knowing how to solve for a variable is crucial.

Here’s an example.




  8.      Mark for Review
       If 3x + 2y = 17 and 5x – 4y = 21, what is the value of y?
Here’s How to Crack It
The question asks for the value of y. Look for the most direct way to get
there. In this case, the stack and solve method doesn’t give you an immediate
answer:

IF YOU ADD: IF YOU SUBTRACT:




IF YOU SUBTRACT:




Neither of these methods gives you the value of y. The best way to approach
this question is to try to eliminate one variable. To do this, multiply one or
both of the equations by a number that will cause the other variable to have a
coefficient of 0 when the equations are added or subtracted.

Since the question is asking you to solve for y, try to make the x terms
disappear. You want to make the coefficient of x zero so you can quickly find
the value of y.

Use the coefficient of x in the second equation, 5, to multiply the first
equation:

                             5(3x + 2y) = 5(17)
                               15x + 10y = 85
Then use the original coefficient of x in the first equation to multiply the
second equation:

                             3(5x – 4y) = 3(21)
                               15x – 12y = 63

Now stack your equations and subtract (or flip the signs and add, which is
less likely to lead to a mistake).




Simplify your equation and you have your answer.

                                  22y = 22
                                    y=1



Number of Solutions to a System of Equations
Some Digital SAT Math questions won’t even ask you to solve for the
solution(s) to a system of equations: they’ll simply ask you how many
solutions there are. A solution to a system is a point of intersection when the
system is graphed, so the graphing calculator can help on these. If you know
the rules of when two linear equations have zero, one, or infinitely many
solutions, you can use that knowledge and a little algebra to answer the
question.

Here’s an example that can be solved algebraically or with a calculator.




  9.     Mark for Review
     Which of the following systems of equations has an infinite number of
     solutions?

         A x = –5
           y = 10

         B x = 10y
           y = 10x

         C y = –4x – 10
           y = –4x – 15

         D
             4y = 2x + 20


Here’s How to Crack It
The question asks which system of equations has infinitely many solutions. A
system of linear equations has infinitely many solutions when the two
equations are identical. That means both equations represent the same line,
so there are infinitely many points of intersection. The two equations in (A)
do not represent the same line, so eliminate (A). The equations in (B) look
similar, but rearrange them to check. Plug y = 10x into the first equation to get
x = 10(10x), which becomes x = 100x. The only possible value of x is 0. Do
the same thing with the second equation: substitute x = 10y to get y =
10(10y), which becomes y = 100y. The only possible value of y is 0. Thus,
the two lines intersect only once, at (0, 0), not infinitely many times.
Eliminate (B). The equations in (C) have the same y-term and the same x-
term, but different constants. This means the lines defined by the equations
are parallel and have zero solutions. Eliminate (C). The equations in (D)
don’t look the same, but do a little algebra to make them look similar. Make
the y-terms the same by multiplying the first equation by 4 to get 4y = 2x +
20. It’s the same equation! That means the two equations describe the same
line, and the system has infinitely many solutions.
The other way to answer a question like this is to use a graphing calculator.
To use the built-in calculator, test one answer at a time by entering each
equation in an entry field and looking in the graphing area to see what the
graphs look like. Graphing the equations in (A) shows two perpendicular
lines that intersect once; eliminate (A). Graphing the equations in (B) shows
two lines that intersect once at the origin; eliminate (B). Graphing the
equations in (C) shows two parallel lines that never intersect; eliminate (C).
Graphing the equations in (D) shows only one line. Click the equations one
after another to see the line change color. This confirms that the exact same
line was graphed twice, so the two equations have infinitely many solutions.

Using either algebra or the calculator, the correct answer is (D).




SOLVING INEQUALITIES
In an equation, one side equals the other. In an inequality, one side does not
equal the other. The following symbols are used in inequalities:



                  SYMBOL                   MEANING
                     >                     is greater than
                     <                     is less than
                                           is greater than or equal to; at
                       ≥
                                           least
                                           is less than or equal to; no
                       ≤
                                           more than



                 Hungry Gator
                 Think of the inequality sign as the mouth of a hungry
                 alligator. The alligator eats the bigger number.
Solving inequalities is pretty similar to solving equations. You can collect
like terms, and you can simplify by performing the same operation to both
sides. All you have to remember is that if you multiply or divide both sides
of an inequality by a negative number, the direction of the inequality symbol
changes.

For example, here’s a simple inequality:

                                     x>y

Now, just as you can with an equation, you can multiply both sides of this
inequality by the same number. But if the number you multiply by is negative,
you have to change the direction of the symbol in the result. For example, if
you multiply both sides of the inequality above by –2, you end up with the
following:

                                   –2x < –2y


         When you multiply or divide an inequality by a negative
         number, you must reverse the inequality sign.


Here’s an example of how an inequality question may be framed on the test.




 10.      Mark for Review
       If –3x + 6 ≥ 18, which of the following must be true?

         A x ≤ –4

         B x≤8
        C x ≥ –4

        D x ≥ –8


Here’s How to Crack It
The question asks for a true statement based on the inequality, and the
answers are all possible values of x. Isolate the x by simplifying the
inequality as you would with any equation:

                                –3x + 6 ≥ 18
                                    –3x ≥ 12

Remember to change the direction of the inequality sign!

                                   x ≤ –4

The correct answer is (A).




WRITING YOUR OWN EQUATIONS
Sometimes you’ll be asked to take a word problem and create one or more
equations or inequalities from that information. In general, you will not be
asked to solve these equations/inequalities, so if you are able to locate and
translate the information in the question, you have a good shot at getting the
correct answer. Always start with the most straightforward piece of
information. What is the most straightforward piece of information? Well,
that’s up to you to decide. Consider the following question.




 11.     Mark for Review
     Max uses a humidifier in his son’s bedroom. The humidifier must be
     filled with 0.5 gallons of water before it starts running, and it has to be
     refilled with 0.07 gallons of water each week. Which of the following
     equations models the total gallons of water, g, needed to run the
     humidifier for w weeks?

        A g = 0.07 + 0.5w

        B g = 0.07(0.5 + w)

        C g = 0.5(0.07 + w)

        D g = 0.5 + 0.07w

                 When to translate
                 Start translating words into math in bite-sized pieces
                 when you see the following:
                     The question asks what “models” or
                     “represents” a situation.
                     The answers contain one or more equations or
                     inequalities.



Here’s How to Crack It
The question asks for an equation that models a situation. Find a
straightforward piece of information, translate it into math, and eliminate
answers that don’t match. One piece of information is that the humidifier
must be filled with 0.5 gallons of water before it starts running. If 0.5 is the
starting value and not something that is added every week, it should not be
multiplied by anything. Only (D) has 0.5 by itself, so it’s the right answer.

What if you started with a different piece of information? The other piece of
information is that the humidifier has to be refilled with 0.07 gallons of
water each week. The question also states that w represents weeks. The
number of gallons added each week must be multiplied by the number of
weeks, which translates to 0.07w. Eliminate (A) and (C) because they do not
include this term, even after distributing. Although (B) includes the term
0.07w after you distribute, the other term becomes 0.035. This does not
match any of the information in the question, so eliminate (B). Only (D) is
left.

It doesn’t matter which piece of information you start with. Just be sure to
eliminate after each piece. In this case, either piece alone was enough to
eliminate 3 answers, so the remaining answer is right. The correct answer is
(D).



Sometimes you will need more than one bite-sized piece in order to
eliminate all but one answer. This will often happen when the answers have
systems of equations or inequalities rather than a single equation or
inequality.

Here’s one of those.




 12.      Mark for Review
       A tailor is ordering red and blue ribbon to use when creating a set of
       dresses. The tailor wants to include at least 200 meters of ribbon in her
       order, and she will order no more than 3 times as much blue ribbon as
       red ribbon. Each spool of red ribbon contains 22.86 meters, and each
       spool of blue ribbon contains 18.29 meters. If r and b are nonnegative
       integers and represent the number of spools of red and blue ribbon,
       respectively, that the tailor will order, which of the inequalities below
       best represents this scenario?

         A 22.86r + 18.29b ≥ 200 3b ≤ r
         B 22.86r + 54.87b ≥ 200 3b ≤ r

         C 22.86r + 18.29b ≥ 200 b ≤ 3r

         D 22.86r + 54.87b ≥ 200 b ≤ 3r


Here’s How to Crack It
The question asks for a system of inequalities that describes the situation.
Start with the most straightforward piece of information and translate it into
math. In this case, the most straightforward information is about the total
meters of ribbon, 200 meters. However, all of the answers include ≥ 200, so
look for something else. The answers also all include 22.86r for the red
ribbon, so work with the blue ribbon. The question states that each spool of
blue ribbon contains 18.29 meters and that b represents the number of
spools of blue ribbon. Therefore, the equation should include 18.29b.
Eliminate (B) and (D) because they have the wrong number multiplied by b.

Next, look at the relationship between the blue and red ribbon. The question
states that she will order no more than 3 times as much blue ribbon as red
ribbon. The phrase no more than is indicated by the symbol ≤, and the
amount of blue ribbon is being compared to 3 times the amount of red ribbon.
The correct inequality to depict this information is b ≤ 3r. Eliminate (A). The
correct answer is (C).




SIMPLIFYING EXPRESSIONS
If a question contains an expression that can be factored, it is very likely that
you will need to factor it to solve the question. So, you should always be on
the lookout for opportunities to factor. For example, if a question contains the
expression 2x + 2y, you should see if factoring it to produce the expression
2(x + y) will help you to solve the problem.
If a question contains an expression that is already factored, you should
consider using the Distributive Law to expand it. For example, if a question
contains the expression 2(x + y), you should see if expanding it to 2x + 2y
will help.

Here are five examples that we’ve worked out:

   1. 4x + 24 = 4(x) + 4(6) = 4(x + 6)

   2.


   3.

   4. 2(x + y) + 3(x + y) = (2 + 3)(x + y) = 5(x + y)

   5. p(r + s) + q(r + s) = (p + q)(r + s)

                   Something to Hide
                   Because factoring or expanding is usually the key to
                   finding the answer on such questions, learn to
                   recognize expressions that could be either factored
                   or expanded. This will earn you more points. The
                   test-writers will try to hide the answer by factoring or
                   expanding the result.


Here’s how this might be tested on the Digital SAT.




 13.       Mark for Review

        Which of the following is equivalent to                 ?

          A
        B

        C a 2 + ab

        D


Here’s How to Crack It
The question asks for an equivalent form of an expression. Two of the
answers have a factored, so try factoring a first. Rewrite each term as a
times something else:




Then factor a out of both terms:




This matches (A), which is the correct answer. You can check by distributing
a in (A) to confirm that it returns the expression to its original form.

Don’t be tempted by (C). It looks plausible because both terms from the
original expression have been multiplied by b. However, you cannot multiply
an expression by a value other than 1. That only works with equations
because then you multiply both sides by the same value. Choice (C) is a trap
answer based on not remembering the difference between an expression and
an equation. The correct answer is (A).



Multiplying Binomials
Multiplying binomials is easy. Just be sure to use FOIL (First, Outer, Inner,
Last).




Combine Like Terms First
When manipulating long, complicated algebraic expressions, combine all
like terms before doing anything else. In other words, if one of the terms is 5x
and another is –3x, simply combine them into 2x. Then you won’t have as
many terms to work with. Here’s an example:

                (3x2 + 3x + 4) + (2 – x) – (6 + 2x) =
                3x2 + 3x + 4 + 2 – x – 6 – 2x =
                3x2 + (3x – x –2x) + (4 + 2 – 6) =
                3x2

                 TERMinology
                 Remember: A term is a number, variable, or a
                 number and variable that are combined by
                 multiplication or division. Consider the expression 6x
                 + 10 – y. In this expression, 6x, 10, and y are all
                 terms. 6x + 10, however, is not a term. It is two
                 terms added together, which makes it an
                 expression.



SOLVING QUADRATIC EQUATIONS
To solve quadratic equations, remember everything you’ve learned so far:
look for direct solutions and either factor or expand when possible.

Here’s an example.
 14.      Mark for Review
       If (x – 3)2 = (x + 2)2, what is the value of x?




Here’s How to Crack It
The question asks for the value of x. Expand both sides of the equation using
FOIL:

                          (x – 3)(x – 3) = (x + 2)(x + 2)
                             x2 – 6x + 9 = x2 + 4x + 4

Now you can simplify. Eliminate the x2 terms because they are on both sides
of the equals sign. Now you have –6x + 9 = 4x + 4, which simplifies to




Factoring Quadratics
To solve a quadratic, you might also have to factor the equation. Factoring a
quadratic basically involves doing a reverse form of FOIL.

For example, suppose you needed to know the factors of x2 + 7x + 12. Here’s
what you would do:

   1. Write down 2 sets of parentheses and put an x in each one because the
      product of the first terms is x2.
                           x2 + 7x + 12 = (x       )(x    )

   2. Look at the number at the end of the expression you are trying to factor.
      Write down its factors. In this case, the factors of 12 are 1 and 12, 2
      and 6, and 3 and 4.

   3. To determine which set of factors to put into the parentheses, look at the
      coefficient of the middle term of the quadratic expression. In this case,
      the coefficient is 7. So, the correct factors will also either add or
      subtract to get 7. The only factors that work are 3 and 4. Write these
      factors in the parentheses.

                        x2 + 7x + 12 = (x __ 3)(x __ 4)

   4. Finally, determine the signs for the factors. To get a positive 12, the 3
      and the 4 are either both positive or both negative. But, since 7 is also
      positive, the signs must both be positive.

                         x2 + 7x + 12 = (x + 3)(x + 4)

                 Factoring
                 When factoring an equation like x 2 + bx + c, think
                 “A.M.” Find two numbers that Add up to the middle
                 term (b) and Multiply to give the last term (c).


You can always check that you have factored correctly by using FOIL on the
factors to see if you get the original quadratic expression.

To find the solutions on paper, you would set each factor equal to zero and
solve for x. This becomes x + 3 = 0 and x + 4 = 0, so x = –3 or –4.

The built-in graphing calculator or your own calculator can also quickly
provide the solutions to a quadratic. We’ll show you how to do it on the
built-in calculator. If you’re planning to use your own, make sure you know
how to do this.
Open the built-in calculator, then enter the quadratic into the first entry field.
Let’s use the same one as above and enter x2 + 7x + 12.

The graph shows three grey dots. One is the vertex, and the other two are the
solutions, or x-intercepts. Hover over or click on one of the x-intercept dots
to see the x-value for that point, and write it down. You can scroll and zoom
to make it easier to see. Do the same for the other x-intercept dot.

The calculator will look like this on the screen:




The two points are (–4, 0) and (–3, 0), so the solutions to the quadratic are x
= –4 and x = –3.

It’s best to enter only the expression and not include “= 0” when you enter a
quadratic in the built-in graphing calculator. Try entering x2 + 7x + 12 = 0,
and the resulting graph is two parallel lines at x = –4 and x = –3. This still
shows the solutions, but it isn’t as easy to interpret as the graph of the
parabola.
Try a Digital SAT question that is much easier to solve using a graphing
calculator.




 15.      Mark for Review
       For the equation 12x2 + 5x – 143 = 0, what is one possible value of x?

         A

         B

         C

         D


Here’s How to Crack It
The question asks for a possible value of x in a quadratic equation. The
values of x are also the solutions to the equation. This quadratic would not be
fun to factor, even with the quadratic formula, so use a graphing calculator
instead. Enter the left side of the equation into the first entry field, then click
on each gray dot along the x-axis and write down the points. The points are
(–3.667, 0) and (3.25, 0). Convert each answer choice into its decimal form,
and eliminate any answer that is not one of these two values of x. Choice (A)
becomes –3.25. This does not match either solution, so eliminate (A). Choice
(B) becomes 0.417; eliminate (B). Choice (C) becomes 3.25. This matches
one of the solutions, so keep (C). Choice (D) becomes 3.667; eliminate (D).
Two of the trap answers have the right value but the wrong sign, so be very
careful with positive versus negative solutions. The correct answer is (C).
Digital SAT Favorites
The test-writers play favorites when it comes to quadratic equations. There
are three equations that they use often. You should memorize these and be on
the lookout for them. Whenever you see a quadratic that contains two
variables, it is frequently one of these three.


                             (x + y)(x – y) = x2 – y2
                            (x + y)2 = x2 + 2xy + y2
                             (x – y)2 = x2 – 2xy + y2


Here’s an example of how these equations will likely be tested on the Digital
SAT.




 16.      Mark for Review
       If 2x – 3y = 5, what is the value of 4x2 – 12xy + 9y2?

         A

         B 12

         C 25

         D 100


Here’s How to Crack It
The question asks for the value of an expression. Since the expression seems
kind of random, see if there is a way to get from the given equation to the
expression.
In this case, work with 2x − 3y = 5. If you square the left side of the equation,
you get

                         (2x – 3y)2 = 4x2 – 12xy + 9y2

That’s precisely the expression for which you need to find the value. It’s also
the third of the equations from the box on the preceding page. Now, since you
squared the left side, all you need to do is square the 5 on the right side of the
equation to discover that the expression equals 25. The correct answer is
(C).

Did you notice that this question was just another version of being asked to
solve for the value of an expression rather than for a variable? Quadratics
are one of the test-writers’ favorite ways to do that.



Solving Quadratics Set to Zero
Before factoring most quadratics, you need to set the equation equal to zero.
Why? Well, if ab = 0, what do you know about a and b? At least one of them
must equal 0, right? That’s the key fact you need in order to solve most
quadratics.

Here’s an example.




 17.        Mark for Review

       If            , and x ≠ 0 , which of the following is a possible value
       for x?

            A –7
         B –1

         C1

         D3


Here’s How to Crack It
The question asks for a possible value of x. Here, the test-writers have tried
to hide that the equation is actually a quadratic. Start by multiplying both
sides of the equation by x to get rid of the fraction.




                                3x – 3 = x2 + 7x

Rearrange the terms to set the quadratic equal to 0. You’ll get x2 + 4x + 3 = 0.
Now it’s time to factor:

                        x2 + 4x + 3 = (x + 1)(x + 3) = 0

At least one of the factors must equal 0. If x + 1 = 0, then x = −1. If x + 3 = 0,
then x = −3. Only one of these values appears in the answer choices. The
correct answer is (B).



The Quadratic Formula
In addition to asking you to solve easily factorable quadratics, the test-
writers would also like to see you demonstrate your understanding of the
quadratic formula. We know what you’re thinking: “Not that thing again!
Can’t I just solve it with a graphing calculator?” Why yes, yes you can.
However, once in a while there’s a question that requires knowledge of the
quadratic formula. Let’s review it so you’re prepared.
          For a quadratic equation in the form y = ax2 + bx + c, the
                            quadratic formula is




To find the roots of a quadratic, or the points where y = 0, simply plug your
values for a, b, and c into the quadratic formula.

Here’s an example:

                              7x2 – 5x – 17 = 0

So a = 7, b = –5, and c = –17. Plugging the constants into the quadratic
equation, you get
                  The Signs, They Are a Changin’
                  The quadratic formula works for quadratics in the
                  form y = ax 2 + bx + c. There is only addition in that
                  form, so be careful when your quadratic has
                  negative signs in it.




Let’s put your quadratic skills to work with a question you may see on the
Digital SAT.

 18.      Mark for Review
       What is the product of all the solutions to the equation 3z2 – 12z + 6 =
       0?

          A

          B2

          C4

          D


Here’s How to Crack It
The question asks for the product of the solutions to a quadratic. The radicals
in the answer choices are a clue that the quadratic may be hard to factor.
Simplify the equation first by dividing both sides by 3 to get

                                    z2 – 4z + 2 = 0

To find the solutions using the quadratic formula x =                      , you

would do the following:
So                      . “Product” means to multiply, so use FOIL to multiply
                   to get                                          . The correct answer

is (B).


                 Call on the calculator
                 Don’t forget that a graphing calculator is a fast way
                 to find the solutions to a quadratic. To answer this
                 question using the built-in graphing calculator, enter
                 the left side of the quadratic, find the values of the
                 two x-intercepts, and multiply them.




Wow, that was a lot of work! Wouldn’t it be great if there were a shortcut?
Actually, there is! When a quadratic is in the form y = ax2 + bx + c, the
product of the roots is equal to the value of c divided by the value of a. In
this case, that’s 6 ÷ 3 = 2! It’s the same answer for a lot less work. (See the
inset that follows for this and another handy trick—they’re worth
memorizing.)
       The Root of the Problems
       Sometimes you’ll be asked to solve for the sum or the
       product of the roots of a quadratic equation. You can use the
       quadratic formula and then add or multiply the results, but it’s
       quicker to just memorize these two expressions.

       sum of the roots:

       product of the roots:



Number of Solutions to a Quadratic Equation
There is one more useful thing that can be determined from just a piece of the
quadratic formula. The part under the root symbol in the formula is called the
discriminant. The value of the discriminant can tell you the number of roots
the quadratic has.


       The discriminant, D, of a quadratic in the standard form ax2 +
       bx + c = 0 is b2 – 4ac.

            If the discriminant is positive, the quadratic has 2 real
            solutions.
            If the discriminant equals 0, the quadratic has 1 real
            solution.
            If the discriminant is negative, the quadratic has no real
            solutions.


You saw earlier in this chapter how a question might ask about the number of
solutions to a system of linear equations. When you see a similar question
about a single quadratic, see if you can graph it or use the discriminant.
Take a look at a typical question.




 19.      Mark for Review
       If the equation 12x = k – 4x2 has exactly one real solution, what is the
       value of the constant k?




                                 Watch Us Crack It



Here’s How to Crack It
The question asks for the value of a constant in a quadratic equation. When a
quadratic has exactly one real solution, the discriminant equals 0. First, put
the quadratic in standard form, which is ax2 + bx + c. Add 4x2 to both sides
of the equation to get 4x2 + 12x = k, and then subtract k from both sides of the
equation to get 4x2 + 12x – k = 0. Now that the quadratic is in standard form,
a = 4, b = 12, and c = –k. Plug the values for a, b, and c into the discriminant,
D = b2 – 4ac, and set it equal to 0 to get 122 – (4)(4)(–k) = 0. Simplify the
left side of the equation to get 144 + 16k = 0. Subtract 16k from both sides of
the equation to get 144 = –16k. Divide both sides of the equation by –16 to
get –9 = k. The correct answer is –9.
GROWTH AND DECAY
There’s one more equation with an exponent that’s tested frequently on the
Digital SAT: the growth and decay formula. Real-world examples include
population growth, radioactive decay, and compound interest, to name a few.
The growth or decay can be a percent or a multiple, which changes what’s
inside the parentheses.


             When the growth or decay rate is a percent of the total
                                 population:

          final amount = original amount (1 ± rate)number of changes

              When the growth or decay is a multiple of the total
                                population:

         final amount = original amount (multiplier)number of changes


Let’s see how this formula can make quick work of an otherwise tedious
question.




 20.      Mark for Review
       Becca deposits $100 into a bank account that earns an annual interest
       rate of 4%. If she does not make any additional deposits and makes no
       withdrawals, how long will it take her, in years, to increase the value
       of her account by at least 60%?

         A 12

         B 15
         C 25

         D 30


Here’s How to Crack It
The question asks for the number of years it will take for Becca’s account to
reach a certain value. You could add 4% to the account over and over again
until you get to the desired amount, but that would take a long time. Knowing
the formula will make it a lot easier. First, set up the equation with the things
you know. The original amount is 100, and the rate is 4%, or 0.04. The
account is increasing, so you add the rate, and you can put in “years” for the
number of changes. The formula becomes

                      final amount = 100(1 + 0.04)years

Now you need to figure out what you want the final amount to be. Translate
the English to math: the value of her account (100) will increase (+) by 60
percent (0.6) of the current value (×100). This becomes 100 + (0.6)(100) =
100 + 60 = 160. Now the formula is

                             160 = 100(1.04)years

The answer choices represent the number of years Becca keeps her money in
the account. Now you are all set to easily plug in the answers. Start with (B),
so years = 15. Is 100(1.04)15 = 160? Use your calculator to check, making
sure to follow PEMDAS rules and do the exponent before you multiply by
100. The result is $180.09. That is a bit too much money, so the answer will
likely be (A), but let’s just check it. 100(1.04)12 = $160.10, which is at least
$160. The correct answer is (A).



Here’s an example of growth with a multiplier instead of a rate.
 21.      Mark for Review

       An invasive species was discovered to have a population of 2,100
       individuals after 10 years of uninhibited growth. The equation
                 gives the number of individuals in the population, where t is
       the number of years after the uninhibited growth began, P is the current

       number of individuals in the population, and G is the number of
       individuals in the population when the uninhibited growth began. What
       is the value of G?

         A 30

         B 700

         C 2,100

         D 6,300


Here’s How to Crack It
The question asks for a value in an equation. The equation is in the form of
the growth and decay formula, and recognizing that leads to the next step.

Label each piece of the formula and fill in the number given for each piece.
The question states that P is the current number of individuals in the
population, and that the invasive species had a population of 2,100
individuals, so P = 2,100. The question also states that 2,100 was the final
amount after 10 years of uninhibited growth, and that t is the number of
years after the uninhibited growth began, so t = 10. Plug those values into

the formula and solve for G:                    . Simplify the right side of the
equation to get 2,100 = G(3)1, and then 2,100 = 3G. Divide both sides of the
equation by 3 to get 700 = G. The correct answer is (B).




WHEN VALUES ARE ABSOLUTE
Absolute value is a measure of the distance between a number and 0. Since
distances are always positive, the absolute value of a number is also always
positive. The absolute value of a number is written as |x|.

When solving for the value of a variable inside the absolute value bars, it is
important to remember that the variable could be either positive or negative.
For example, if |x| = 2, then x = 2 or x = −2, as both 2 and −2 are a distance
of 2 from 0.

Here’s an example.




 22.      Mark for Review
       Which of the following is the value of | y + z | if y and z are the
       solutions to the equation | –4x – 2 | = 6?

          A –3

          B –2

          C1
         D3

                  Digital SAT Smoke and Mirrors
                  When you’re asked to solve an equation involving an
                  absolute value, it is very likely that the correct
                  answer will involve the negative result. Why?
                  Because the test-writers know that you are less
                  likely to think about the negative result! Another way
                  to avoid mistakes is to do all the math inside the
                  absolute value symbols first, and then make the
                  result positive.



Here’s How to Crack It
The question asks for the value of an expression with an absolute value given
an equation with an absolute value. Start with the equation and find the two
solutions. Remember that the expression inside the absolute value symbols
could be positive or negative and will still yield a positive result. Set that
expression, –4x – 2, equal to 6 and –6, and solve for the two solutions.




Thus, the solutions y and z are –2 and 1. There’s no way to know which is y
and which is z, but it doesn’t matter. Replace the variables in the expression |
y + z | with those values in either order, and calculate the result.

                                | –2 + 1 | = | –1 | = 1

If you’re curious, try the other order for y and z to see that, because of the
absolute value, it still works.

                         | 1 + (–2) | = | 1 – 2 | = | –1 | = 1

In either case the result is 1. The correct answer is (C).
Algebra Drill
Work these questions without your calculator using the skills you’ve learned
so far. Answers and explanations can be found starting on this page.

  1.      Mark for Review
       For the inequality 3 > 9x – 3, which of the following is a possible
       value of x?

         A0

         B

         C3

         D6


  2.      Mark for Review

       For the equation                  , the value of m is –3. Which of the
       following contains all possible solutions to the equation?

         A –3, 3

         B –2

         C –2, –7

         D 3, 6


  3.      Mark for Review
     The equation           expresses the relationship among a, c, d, and z.

     Which of the following equations expresses z in terms of a, c and d?

        A

        B

        C

        D


4.      Mark for Review

     A student spends      hours each day working on history and science
     assignments. It takes the student   of an hour to complete a history

     assignment and     of an hour to complete a science assignment. Which

     of the following equations represents the number of history
     assignments, h, and science assignments, s, the student can complete
     each day?

        A


        B


        C

        D
5.        Mark for Review
     If x + 6 > 0 and 1 – 2x > –1, which of the following values of x is NOT
     a solution?

          A –6

          B –4

          C0

          D


6.        Mark for Review

     If              , what is the value of x?

          A

          B

          C0

          D2


7.        Mark for Review
     If the product of x and y is 76, and x is twice the square of y, which of
     the following pairs of equations could be used to determine the values
     of x and y?

          A xy = 76 x = 2y2
        B xy = 76 x = (2y)2

        C x + y = 76 x = 4y2

        D xy = 76 x = x = 2y


 8.      Mark for Review
      A tadpole that has just hatched from an egg weighs t grams. The
      equation y = t(3) w displays the weight y, in grams, of the tadpole w
      weeks after it hatches. If the tadpole reaches a weight of 9.72 grams at
      5 weeks after hatching, what is the value of t?




 9.      Mark for Review
      How many solutions exist to the equation ½x½ = ½2x – 1½?

        A0

        B1

        C2

        D3


10.      Mark for Review
      The sum of three numbers, a, b, and c, is 400. One of the numbers, a, is
      40 percent less than the sum of b and c. What is the value of b + c?

        A 40

        B 60
C 150

D 250
CHAPTER DRILL ANSWERS AND
EXPLANATIONS
Algebra Drill
1.   A

     The question asks for a value in an inequality. To begin to isolate x, add
     3 to both sides of the equation to get 6 > 9x. Divide both sides of the
     equation by 9 to get       . Because 9 is positive, it is not necessary to

     flip the inequality sign. Reduce the fraction to get       . Only (A) is

     less than . The correct answer is (A).

2.   B

     The question asks for all possible solutions to an equation. Since the
     question gives the value of m, the first step is to plug that value into the
     original equation to get                   . Now square both sides of the

     equation to remove the square root:                             or –3x – 5
     = x2 + 6x + 9. Now combine like terms. If you combine the terms on the
     right side of the equation, you can avoid having a negative x2 term. The
     equation becomes 0 = x2 + 9x + 14. Factor the quadratic to find the
     roots: 0 = (x + 2)(x + 7). The possible solutions to the quadratic are –2
     and –7. Don’t forget to plug these numbers back into the original
     equation to check for extraneous solutions. Begin by checking x = –2.

     When you do this, you get                  = (–2) + 3, or           = 1, or
           , which is true. Now, check x = –7. Set it up as                    =
     (–7) + 3, and start simplifying to get        = –4. You can technically
     stop simplifying here, as there is a negative number on the right-hand
     side of the equals sign. Remember, when taking a square root with a
     radical provided, it will yield the positive root only. So –7 cannot be

     part of the solution set. Be very careful of (C), which is a trap answer.
     The correct answer is (B).

3.   A

     The question asks for an equation in terms of a specific variable. To

     begin to isolate z, cross-multiply to get (20)(3d) = (ac)(z), which
     becomes 60d = (ac)(z). Divide both sides of the equation by ac to get

             . The correct answer is (A).

4.   C

     The question asks for an equation that represents a specific situation.

     Translate the information in bite-sized pieces and eliminate after each

     piece. All of the answer choices equal , which represents the

     hours each day the student spends on both types of assignment. The left
     side of the equation must add up to that total time. One piece of
     information says that it takes the student    of an hour to complete a

     history assignment, and another piece says that h represents the
     number of history assignments. The total time spent on history

     assignments can be represented by       . Eliminate (D) because it

     multiplies h by    instead of by . Choice (A) includes the term

     after FOILing, but it also includes hs. There is no reason to multiply the
     number of history assignments by the number of science assignments, so

     eliminate (A). Choice (B) includes the term        after FOILing, but h

     should only be multiplied by . Eliminate (B). Choice (C) also

     correctly multiplies the time per science assignment by the number of

     science assignments to get     . The correct answer is (C).

5.   A

     The question asks for the value of x that is not a solution. Solve the first
     inequality by subtracting 6 from each side so that x > –6. You are
     looking for values that won’t work for x, and x cannot equal –6.
     Therefore, the answer must be (A). Just to be sure, solve the next
     inequality by subtracting 1 from each side to get –2x > –2. Divide by –
     2, remembering to switch the sign because you are dividing by a
     negative number to get x < 1. The values in (B), (C), and (D) fit this
     requirement as well, so they are values for x and not the correct
     answer. The correct answer is (A).

6.   B
     The question asks for the value of x. To solve this equation, use cross-
     multiplication to get (2x)(x + 2) = (x2 + 1)(2). Expand the equation to
     get 2x2 + 4x = 2x2 + 2. Once you combine like terms, the result is 2x2 –
     2x2 + 4x = 2 or 4x = 2. Solve for x by dividing both sides by 4 to get

            . The correct answer is (B).

7.   A

     The question asks for a pair of equations to represent the situation.
     Translate each statement, piece by piece. The first part tells you that
     “the product of x and y is 76.” Since product means multiplication, the
     first equation must be xy = 76, so you can eliminate (C). The second
     part says that “x is twice the square of y,” which translates to x = 2y2,
     so eliminate (B) and (D), and (A) is the only choice left. Notice that
     only the y needs to be squared, which is why (B) is wrong. The second
     equation for (B) would be written as “the square of twice y,” which is
     not what the question states. The correct answer is (A).

8.   0.04

     The question asks for a value given a specific situation. The weight of
     the tadpole is increasing by a multiple over time, so write down the
     growth and decay formula. That formula is final amount = (original
     amount)(multiplier)number of changes. The equation in the question
     already shows that 3 is the multiplier. The question states that the
     tadpole reaches a weight of 9.72 grams at 5 weeks after hatching, so
     9.72 is the final amount and 5 is the number of changes. Plug in these
     values and solve for t. The equation becomes 9.72 = t(3)5. Start with
     the exponent on the right side of the equation to get 9.72 = t(243).
     Divide both sides of the equation by 243 to get 0.04 = t. The correct
     answer is 0.04, which can also be entered in the fill-in box as .04 or a
     fractional equivalent.

9.   C

     The question asks for the number of solutions to an equation. If |x| = |2x
     – 1|, either x = 2x – 1 or –x = 2x – 1. The solutions to these equations

     are 1 and , respectively. However, the only thing you need to

     recognize is that the equation has two different solutions. Another
     option is making a quick graph on a calculator, which will show you
     that there are two solutions and what those solutions are. Either way,
     the correct answer is (C).

10. D

     The question asks for the value of b + c. This is a system of equations
     question in disguise. First, locate a piece of information in this question
     that you can work with. “The sum of three numbers, a, b, and c, is 400,”
     seems very straightforward. Write the equation a + b + c = 400. Now
     the question tells you that “one of the numbers, a, is 40 percent less
     than the sum of b and c.” Translate this piece by piece to get a = (1 –
     0.4)(b + c), or a = 0.6(b + c). Distribute the 0.6 to get a = 0.6b + 0.6c.
     Arrange these variables so they line up with those in the first equation
     as a – 0.6b – 0.6c = 0. To solve for b + c, stack the equations and
     multiply the second equation by –1:




     Now solve:
Simplify by dividing both sides by 1.6 to get b + c = 250. The correct
answer is (D).
Summary
 Don’t “solve for x” or “solve for y” unless you absolutely have to.
 (Don’t worry; your math teacher won’t find out.) Instead, look for direct
 solutions to Digital SAT questions. Math section questions rarely require
 time-consuming computations or endless fiddling with big numbers.
 There’s almost always a trick—if you can spot it.

 If a question contains an expression that can be factored, factor it. If it
 contains an expression that already has been factored, multiply it out.

 To solve systems of equations, simply add or subtract the equations. If
 you don’t have the answer, look for multiples of your solutions. When
 the question asks for a single variable and addition and subtraction don’t
 work, try to make something disappear. Multiply the equations to make
 the coefficient(s) of the variable(s) you don’t want go to zero when the
 equations are added or subtracted.

 If a question asks for the number of solutions, the graphing calculator can
 help, but it’s also useful to know the rules.
      Two linear equations have no solution when they have the same
      coefficient on the variable but different constants. This makes the
      lines parallel.
      Two linear equations have exactly one solution when a single (x, y)
      point is a solution to both equations. The two lines intersect once.
      Two linear equations have infinitely many solutions when they
      have the same coefficient on the variable and the same constants.
      This makes them the same line.

 Some Digital SAT questions require algebraic manipulation. Use tricks
 when you can, but if you have to manipulate the equation, take your time
 and work carefully to avoid unnecessary mistakes. You don’t get partial
 credit for getting the question mostly correct.
When working with inequalities, don’t forget to flip the sign when you
multiply and divide by negative numbers.

When asked to create an equation, start with the most straightforward
piece of information. You can also use the equations in the answer
choices to help you narrow down the possibilities for your equation.
Eliminate any answers in which an equation doesn’t match your
equation.

When a question asks for an extraneous solution, first solve the equation,
and then plug the answers back into the equation. If the equation is not
true when solved with the solution, then that solution is extraneous.

When solving quadratic equations, you may need to use FOIL or factor to
get the equation into the easiest form for the question task. Don’t forget
about the common equations that the test-writers use when writing
questions about quadratics.

To solve for the roots of a quadratic equation, set it equal to zero by
moving all the terms to the left side of the equation, then factor and
solve, or use the quadratic formula:




When solving for the sum or product of the roots, you can also use these
formulas:
    sum of the roots:

    product of the roots:

The discriminant of a quadratic in the form ax2 + bx + c = 0 is the value
of           . If this value is positive, there are 2 real roots; if it is 0,
there is 1 real root; if it is negative, there are no real roots. A graphing
calculator can also help with questions about the number of solutions to
a quadratic equation.

When a question is about exponential growth or decay, use the following
formula:

       final amount = (original amount)(1 ± rate)number of changes

If the change is by a multiple instead of a rate, use the same formula with
multiplier inside the parentheses.

The absolute value of a number is its distance from zero; distances are
always positive. When working inside the | |, remember to consider both
the positive and the negative values of the expression. Also remember
that | | work like ( ); you need to complete all the operations inside the | |
before you can make the value positive.
Chapter 22
Other Digital SAT Algebra Strategies
Now that you’re familiar with the basics of algebra, it’s time to learn how to
avoid using algebra on the Digital SAT. Yes, you read that correctly. Algebra
questions on the Digital SAT are filled with traps carefully laid by the test-
writers, so you need to know how to work around them. This chapter gives
you the strategies you need in order to turn tricky algebra questions into
simple arithmetic.
PRINCETON REVIEW ALGEBRA—AKA HOW
TO AVOID ALGEBRA ON THE DIGITAL SAT
Now that you’ve reviewed some basic algebra, it’s time to find out when and
how NOT to use it on the Digital SAT. The Digital SAT is not your math
class at school, and all that matters is the correct answer. So we’re going to
show you how to avoid doing algebra on the Digital SAT whenever possible.
Even if you love algebra, using it all the time on the Digital SAT can actually
hurt your score, and we don’t want that.

We know it’s difficult to come to terms with this. But if you use only algebra
on the Digital SAT, you’re doing exactly what the test-writers want you to do.
You see, when the test-writers design the questions on the Digital SAT, they
expect the students to use algebra to solve them. Many Digital SAT problems
have built-in traps meant to take advantage of common mistakes that students
make when using algebra. But if you don’t use algebra, there’s no way you
can fall into those traps.

Plus, when you avoid algebra, you add one other powerful tool to your tool
belt: you can use the built-in calculator or your own! Calculators can help
with algebra, but they’re designed first and foremost for arithmetic. Our goal,
then, is to turn algebra on the Digital SAT into arithmetic. We do that using
techniques we call Plugging In and Plugging In the Answers (PITA).

                 Your Best Friend
                 Plugging In allows you to use your calculator on
                 many of the algebra questions that show up on the
                 Digital SAT.



PLUGGING IN THE ANSWERS (PITA)
Algebra uses letters to stand for numbers. You don’t go to the
grocery store to buy x eggs or y gallons of milk. Most people
think about math in terms of numbers, not letters that stand for
numbers.
You should think in terms of numbers on the Digital SAT as much as possible.
On many Digital SAT algebra questions, even very difficult ones, you will be
able to find the correct answer without using any algebra at all. You will do
this by working backward from the answer choices instead of trying to solve
the problem using your standard math-class methods.

Plugging In the Answers is a useful technique for solving word problems in
which the answer choices are all numbers. Using this powerful technique can
solve many algebra problems on the Digital SAT simply and quickly.

In algebra class at school, you solve word problems by using equations.
Then, you check your solution by plugging in your answer to see if it works.
Why not skip the equations entirely by simply checking the four possible
solutions on the multiple-choice questions? One of these is the correct
answer. You don’t have to do any algebra, you will seldom have to try more
than two choices, and you will never have to try all four. Use PITA for
questions that ask for a specific amount.

Here’s an example of using PITA instead of writing equations.




  1.      Mark for Review
       On a certain assignment, student X takes 20 seconds per grammar
       question and 35 seconds per punctuation question. On the same
       assignment, student Y takes 30 seconds per grammar question and 55
       seconds per punctuation question. It takes 310 seconds for student X to
       complete the assignment and 480 seconds for student Y to complete the
       assignment. If those are the only two types of questions on the
       assignment, how many punctuation questions are on the assignment?

         A5

         B6
        C7

        D8


Here’s How to Crack It
The question asks for a value given a specific situation. Sure, you could
make up some variables, translate words into equations, and use skills from
the previous chapter to solve the system of equations, but that’s what you
would do in math class at school. On the Digital SAT, there’s a better way.
Notice that the question asks for a single, specific value: the number of
punctuation questions on the assignment. Each answer choice also has a
single, specific value. One of those values has to be the answer to the
question, so start with the answers and plug them into the question.

Before you plug in an answer, make sure you know what the answers
represent. The question asks for the number of punctuation questions, so
rewrite the answers on your scratch paper and label them “# of punct Qs” or
something similar.

                 Representation
                 Make sure you know what the numbers in the
                 answer choices represent. Be sure to label them!


Now it’s time to start working the steps of the problem. But first, notice that
the answer choices are in numerically ascending order. The test-writers like
to keep their questions organized, so they will always put the answers in
order on this kind of question. You can use that to your advantage by starting
with one of the middle answer choices. If it ends up being too big or small,
you should be able to eliminate more than one answer. If the first answer you
plug in happens to work, you can just stop there. Try (B) first.
Look at (B) and ask yourself, “If the number of punctuation questions is 6,
what’s the next thing I can figure out?” In this case, you could figure out how

much time each student spends on punctuation questions. The question states
that student X takes 35 seconds per punctuation question, so student X will
take (6)(35) = 210 seconds to finish the punctuation questions. It takes

student X a total of 310 seconds to complete the assignment, so that leaves
310 – 210 = 100 seconds for the grammar questions. The question also states

that student X takes 20 seconds per grammar question, so there are

grammar questions.

Next, do the same thing for student Y, who takes 55 seconds per punctuation
question. If there are 6 punctuation questions, that’s (6)(55) = 330 seconds.

Student Y takes 480 seconds to complete the assignment, so that leaves 480 –
330 = 150 seconds for the grammar questions. The question states that

student Y takes 30 seconds per grammar question, so there are

grammar questions.

Take a look at the numbers on your scratch paper. Did both students complete
6 punctuation questions? Yes, because that’s the number you plugged in. Did
both students complete 5 grammar questions? Yes, they did. Are you done?
Yes, you are!

If you had started with a different number, somewhere along the way the math
wouldn’t have worked. You would end up with a fractional number of
questions, or the two students wouldn’t have the same number of each
question type. When that happens, cross out the answer and try another one.
In some cases, you’ll be able to tell whether the number you tried was too
big or too small, which helps you eliminate more answers and choose which
one to try next. That’s not necessary here because the first number you tried
worked. The correct answer is (B).



Here are the steps for solving a problem using the PITA approach:



       To solve a problem by plugging in the answers:

         1. Rewrite the answer choices on your scratch
            paper and label them.
         2. Starting with one of the middle answer choices, work the
            steps of the problem.
         3. Look for something in the question that tells you what
            must happen for the answer to be correct.
         4. When you find the correct answer, STOP.


You’ve seen how PITA gets you through a word problem quickly, efficiently,
and accurately. But the technique also works on questions that aren’t word
problems but still ask for a specific value and have numbers in the answer
choices. Here’s an example.




  2.    Mark for Review
                                 2x + y = 6
                                7x + 2y = 27
     The system of equations above is satisfied by which of the following
     ordered pairs (x, y)?

        A (–5, 4)

        B (4, –2)

        C (5, 4)

        D (5, –4)




                   Which Way?
                   Sometimes, it’s hard to tell if you need a larger
                   number or a smaller number if the first answer you
                   tried didn’t work. Don’t fret. Just pick a direction and
                   go! Spend your time trying answers rather than
                   worrying about going in the wrong direction.



Here’s How to Crack It
The question asks for the coordinates of the point that satisfies the system of
equations. When you feel the urge to do a whole lot of algebra, it is a good
time to check whether it would be possible to just plug in the answers
instead. In this case, trying your answer choices will be not only effective but
also incredibly fast.

Start by rewriting the answer choices on your scratch paper and labeling
them “(x, y).” It doesn’t seem like you will be able to tell whether to move
up or down this time, as the ordered pairs don’t really have an ascending or
descending order, but start in the middle anyway. Even if you end up trying
three of the four, you will be saving time by plugging in the answers instead
of solving.

Starting with (B) gives you 4 for x and –2 for y. Try that out in the first
equation: 2(4) + (–2) = 6. That matches the first equation, so this is a
possibility. Try it out in the second equation: 7(4) + 2(–2) = 24. That does
not match the second equation, so you can eliminate (B).

Try out (C) next. If x = 5 and y = 4, then 2(5) + 4 = 14, and you wanted it to
be 6, so you can eliminate this answer choice as well.

Move on to (D). That would give you 2(5) + (–4) = 6. So far so good! Try
the second equation to see if this choice satisfies both: 7(5) + 2(–4) = 27.
This works, so the correct answer is (D).



You may recall that we covered questions like this in the last chapter. It is
important to know how to solve these, in case a question like this comes up
on a fill-in question. When you have answers available to you, though, don’t
be afraid to use them!

One last thing about PITA: here’s how to determine whether you should use
this approach to solve a problem.



       Three ways to know that it’s time for PITA:

         1. There are numbers in the answer choices.
         2. The question asks for a specific amount. Look for
            phrases like “the number of,” “what was,” or “how
            many.”
         3. You have the urge to write an algebraic equation to solve
            the problem.
Here’s an example of using PITA instead of writing equations.




  3.      Mark for Review
       A bakery sold exactly 85% of the cupcakes it baked on Tuesday. Which
       of the following could be the total number of cupcakes baked on
       Tuesday?

         A 130

         B 140

         C 145

         D 150


Here’s How to Crack It
The question asks for a possible total number of cupcakes. Is your first
reaction that there isn’t nearly enough information here to start on this
question? That makes it a great opportunity to plug in the answers! Start with
one of the middle answer choices and test it out. Sometimes, even if you
can’t see how a question works ahead of time, it starts to make a lot more
sense once you plug real numbers into it.

Choice (C) is 145, but 145 what? Read the question very carefully. The
question asks for the total number of cupcakes baked on Tuesday, so rewrite
the answer choices and label them “Total.”

Next, work your way through the problem. If 145 is the total number of
cupcakes baked on Tuesday, the number the bakery sold on Tuesday is 85%
of 145, or 123.25. Have you ever bought 0.25 cupcakes at a bakery? It would
be really weird for a bakery to sell fractions of cupcakes, so this answer
could not be the total number baked on Tuesday.

In this particular question, it is hard to tell whether you should try bigger or
smaller numbers next, but you have learned two things from your first
attempt: you can get rid of (C), and the correct answer will be the one that
gives you a whole number of cupcakes. Instead of spending time trying to
predict which direction to go for the answer, just get to work on the other
answer choices.

Try (B) next. If the bakery baked 140 cupcakes on Tuesday, it sold 85% of
140, or 119. Is there anything wrong with selling 119 cupcakes? No! Since
the bakery sold only whole cupcakes, the correct answer is (B).



Here’s another example of how PITA turns algebra into arithmetic.




   4.      Mark for Review
        For what value of x is |2x + 3| + 5 = 0?

           A –4

           B0

           C4

           D There is no such value of x.


Here’s How to Crack It
The question asks for the value of x. Although we covered it in the last
chapter, solving algebraically on an absolute value question can be
treacherous. There are so many ways to go wrong with those signs! Luckily,
this absolute value question comes complete with answer choices, so we can
simply plug in the answers to get a solution. As always, start by rewriting the
answer choices on your scratch paper and labeling them. In this case, the
label is simply “x.”

Start with (C). When you put 4 in for x, you get |2(4) + 3| + 5 = 0, or 16 = 0.
This is clearly not true, so cross off (C) and move on to (B). If x is 0, then the
original equation becomes |2(0) + 3 | + 5 = 0 or 8 = 0, so you can eliminate
(B) as well. Next, try (A): |2(–4) + 3 | + 5 = 0 could be rewritten as |–8 + 3 |
+ 5 = 0, or |–5| + 5 = 0. As long as you remember that the absolute value of a
number is always positive, it is clear that this gives you 5 + 5 = 0. Since this
is also clearly untrue, eliminate (A). Apparently, there is no such value of x!
The correct answer is (D).




SOLVING RATIONAL EQUATIONS
A rational equation is basically an equation in which one (or more) of the
terms is a fractional one. Rational equations look scary, but there are very
simple ways of solving them. All in all, the test-writers can’t get too messy
here, so they will keep the math nice and tidy. Try the following question.




   5.      Mark for Review




        Which of the following is a possible value of x – 3 in the equation
        above?

          A
        B5

        C 3+

        D 25




                               Watch Us Crack It



Here’s How to Crack It
The question asks for a possible value of (x –3) in an equation with fractions
and binomials. You could use your skills with quadratics from the last
chapter, but it’s much simpler to use PITA! After all, there are numbers in the
answers and the question asks for a specific value, so it sure looks like a
PITA question. This approach will also avoid the issue of extraneous
solutions.

Follow the PITA approach: start by rewriting the answers on your scratch
paper and labeling them as “x – 3” and then start with one of the middle
answer choices. The value in (C) looks complicated, so start with (B), 5.
When x – 3 = 5, the equation becomes

                                      or 5 = 1


This is not true, so eliminate (B). Plugging in 25 would make the fraction too

small, so ballpark out (D). Try the next simplest answer, (A). When x – 3 =
   , the equation becomes




Multiply both sides by      to get 5 = 5, or use a calculator to find out that the

two sides are equal. This makes the equation accurate, so          is a possible
value of x – 3. The correct answer is (A).




PLUGGING IN YOUR OWN NUMBERS
Plugging In the Answers enables you to find the answer to questions whose
answer choices are all numbers. What about questions that have answer
choices containing variables? On these questions, you will usually be able to
find the answer by plugging in your own numbers.



       Plugging In is easy. It has three steps:

         1. Pick numbers for the variables in the question.
         2. Use your numbers to find an answer to the questions.
            Circle your answer.
         3. Plug your number(s) for the variable(s) into the answer
            choices and eliminate choices that don’t equal the
            answer you found in Step 2.



The Basics of Plugging In Your Own Numbers
This sort of Plugging In is simple to understand. Here’s an example.
      6.      Mark for Review

           Which of the following is equivalent to         ?


             A


             B


             C


             D


Here’s How to Crack It
The question asks for an equivalent form of an expression. Rather than do

complicated algebra, try plugging in. First, pick a number for y. Pick
something easy to work with, like 2. On your scratch paper, write y = 2 so
you won’t forget. Then plug in 2 everywhere there’s a y in the expression to

get                  , which becomes             , then        , and then        .

Either find a common denominator and subtract the fractions by hand to get

                    or use a calculator to get the decimal equivalent of –0.06. In

either form, this is your target value. Write it on the scratch paper and circle
it.
Next, plug y = 2 into the answer choices and eliminate ones that do not equal
the target value. Rewrite the answers one at a time with 2 in place of y.

       A)

            Not the target; eliminate!

       B)

            Matches the target; keep but check the rest just in case.

       C)

            Not the target; eliminate!

       D)

            Not the target; eliminate!

Only (B) matches the target value, so it’s the correct answer.



Here’s another example.




  7.        Mark for Review
       During a special sale at a furniture store, Erica bought a floor lamp at a
       10% discount. She paid a total of t dollars, which included the
       discounted price of the floor lamp and a 6% sales tax on the discounted
       price. In terms of t, what was the original price of the floor lamp?
        A

        B (0.9)(1.06)t

        C

        D 0.96t

                  Get Real
                  Trying to imagine how numbers behave in the
                  abstract is a waste of time. So, if the question says
                  that Tina is x years old, why not plug in your own
                  age? That’s real enough. You don’t have to change
                  your name to Tina.



Here’s How to Crack It
The question asks for an expression to represent the situation. This could be
a pretty tricky algebra question, but if you read the question carefully and
plug in easy numbers, it will be a breeze.

Start at the beginning. When Erica bought that floor lamp on sale, what did
you really wish you knew? It would be very helpful to start this problem
knowing the original price of the floor lamp. So, start plugging in there. Plug
in a number that you know how to take a percentage of, like 100. Write down
“original = 100” and move on to the next step of the problem. Erica got a
10% discount, so take 10% of the original price. That means she got a $10
discount, and the discounted price of her floor lamp was $90. Write that
down and move on to the sales tax. If you read carefully, it is clear that the
sales tax is 6% of the discounted price. So, you need to take 6% of the $90
discounted price, or $5.40. To get her total, add the $5.40 of tax to the $90
for the discounted floor lamp, and you get $95.40. This is where the careful
reading comes in. The variable t in this question is supposed to be the total
amount she paid, so make sure that you label this “t = $95.40.”
Next, read the last sentence of the question again to be sure you know which
of the answers is your target answer. The question asks for the original price
of the floor lamp, so circle the number you plugged in for the original price.
Your target answer is 100.

On to the answer choices! When you put $95.40 in for t in (A), you get
99.375. This is not your target answer, so you can eliminate (A). Choice (B)
gives you 91.0116, so that will not work either. Plugging $95.40 into (C)
yields the target of 100, so hang on to it while you check (D) just in case.
When you plug $95.40 into (D), you get 91.584. Since that does not match
your target, you can eliminate (D). The correct answer is (C).



Which Numbers?
Although you can plug in any number, you can make your life much easier by
plugging in “good” numbers—numbers that are simple to work with or that
make the problem easier to manipulate. Picking a small number, such as 2,
will usually make finding the answer easier. If the question asks for a
percentage, plug in 100. If the question has to do with minutes, try 30 or 120.




                 Be Good
                 “Good” numbers make a problem less confusing by
                 simplifying the arithmetic. This is your chance to
                 make the Digital SAT easier for you.


Except in special cases, you should avoid plugging in 0 and 1; these
numbers have weird properties. Using them may allow you to eliminate only
one or two choices at a time. You should also avoid plugging in any number
that appears in the question or in any of the answer choices. Using those
numbers could make more than one answer match your target. If more than
one answer choice matches your target, plug in a new number and check
those answer choices. You may have to plug in more than once to eliminate
all three incorrect answers.

Many times you’ll find that there is an advantage to picking a particular
number, even a very large one, because it makes solving the problem more
straightforward.

Here’s an example.




  8.      Mark for Review
       If 60 equally priced downloads cost x dollars, then how much do 9
       downloads cost?

         A

         B

         C 60x + 9

         D


Here’s How to Crack It
The question asks for the cost of 9 downloads. Since the question is asking
you to arrive at a number (how much 9 downloads cost) in terms of variable
x, try plugging in. Should you plug in 2 for x? You could, but plugging in 120
would make the math easier. After all, if 60 downloads cost a total of $120,
then each download costs $2. Write x = 120 on your scratch paper.
If each download costs $2, then 9 downloads cost $18. Write an 18 and
circle it. You are looking for the answer choice that works out to 18 when
you plug in $120 for x. Try each choice:

       A)


       B)

       C) 60(120) + 9 ≠ 18

       D)           = 18

That last one matches the target answer, so the correct answer is (D).



Let’s try another example.




  9.        Mark for Review
       A watch loses x minutes every y hours. At this rate, how many hours
       will the watch lose in one week?

            A 7xy

            B

            C

            D
                               Watch Us Crack It



Here’s How to Crack It
The question asks for the number of hours lost in one week and gives
information about minutes. This is an extremely difficult question for students
who try to solve it using math-class algebra. You’ll be able to find the
answer easily, though, if you plug in carefully.

What numbers should you plug in? As always, you can plug in anything.
However, if you think just a little bit before choosing the numbers, you can
make the question easier to understand. There are three units of time—
minutes, hours, and weeks—and that’s a big part of the reason this question is
hard to understand. If you choose units of time that are easy to think about,
you’ll make the question easier to handle.

Start by choosing a value for x, which represents the number of minutes that
the watch loses. You might be tempted to choose x = 60 and that would make
the math pretty easy. However, it’s usually not a good idea to choose a
conversion factor such as 60, the conversion factor between minutes and
hours, for plugging in. When a question deals with time, 30 is usually a safer
choice to avoid having multiple answers work the first time you plug in. So,
write down x = 30.

Next, you need a number for y, which represents the number of hours. Again,
you might be tempted to use y = 24, but that’s the conversion factor between
hours and days. Therefore, y = 12 is a safer choice. Write down y = 12.
Now, it’s time to solve the problem to come up with a target. If the watch
loses 30 minutes every 12 hours, then it loses 60 minutes every 24 hours. Put
another way, the watch loses an hour each day. In one week, the watch will
lose 7 hours. That’s your target, so be sure to circle it.

Now, you just need to check the answer choices to see which one gives you 7
when x = 30 and y = 12.

     A) 7xy = 7(30)(12) = Something too big! Cross it off.

     B)                      Also wrong.


     C)                         . Cross it off.


     D)                        Choose it!

The correct answer is (D).




MEANING IN CONTEXT
Some questions, instead of asking you to come up with an equation, just want
you to recognize what a part of the equation stands for. These questions will
look like algebra, with variables and equations, but they’re often more about
reading carefully, working in bite-sized pieces, and using your pencil.

First things first, though, you want to think about your POOD. Do these
questions make sense to you, or are they a little confusing? Do you usually
get them right quickly, or do they take up too much time? You can always use
the Mark for Review tool to flag a meaning in context question to come back
to later after you get some easier, quicker questions right.
If the question does fit your POOD, read carefully, write down labels for the
parts of the equation, and use POE to get rid of any answer choices that don’t
match your labels.

Here’s an example.




 10.      Mark for Review
       There are m boxes of red marbles and n boxes of blue marbles in a
       crate, and the crate contains a total of 204 marbles. If this situation is
       represented by the equation 12m + 7n = 204, what does the number 12
       most likely represent?

          A The total number of red marbles

          B The total number of blue marbles

          C The number of red marbles in each box

          D The number of blue marbles in each box


Here’s How to Crack It
The question asks for the meaning of a value in context. Start by reading the
final question, which asks for the meaning of the number 12. Then label the
parts of the equation with the information given. The question states that
there are m boxes of red marbles, so label m as “# of boxes of red marbles.”
Similarly, label n as “# of boxes of blue marbles.” The question also states
that the crate contains a total of 204 marbles, so label 204 as “total # of
marbles.” The equation is now labeled as follows:

       12(# of boxes of red marbles) + 7(# of boxes of blue marbles) =
                             (total # of marbles)
Next, use Process of Elimination to get rid of answer choices that are not
consistent with the labels. Since 12 is multiplied by the number of boxes of
red marbles, it has something to do with the red marbles. Eliminate (B) and
(D) because they refer to blue marbles. Since 12 is multiplied by the number
of boxes of red marbles, it must represent a value per box, not a total value.
Keep (C) because it is consistent with this information, and eliminate (A)
because it refers to a total number. The correct answer is (C).



If labeling the equation isn’t enough to eliminate three answers, try plugging
in! This will help clarify what’s going on in confusing equations or show the
relationship between two parts of an equation.

Let’s try a meaning in context question that uses plugging in.




 11.      Mark for Review

                                 n = 1,273 – 4p

       The equation above was used by the cafeteria in a large public high
       school to model the relationship between the number of slices of pizza,
       n, sold daily and the price of a slice of pizza, p, in dollars. What does
       the number 4 represent in this equation?

          A For every $4 the price of pizza decreases, the cafeteria sells
            1 more slice of pizza.

          B For every dollar the price of pizza decreases, the cafeteria
             sells 4 more slices of pizza.

          C For every $4 the price of pizza increases, the cafeteria sells
             1 more slice of pizza.
        D For every dollar the price of pizza increases, the cafeteria
          sells 4 more slices of pizza.


Here’s How to Crack It
The question asks for the meaning of the number 4 in the context of the
situation. First, read the question very carefully, and label the variables on
your scratch paper. You know that p is the price of pizza, and n is the number
of slices, so you can add that information to the equation. If you can,
eliminate answer choices that don’t make sense. But what if you can’t
eliminate anything, or you can eliminate only an answer choice or two?

Even with everything labeled, this equation is difficult to decode, so it’s time
to plug in! Try a few of your own numbers in the equation, and you will get a
much better understanding of what is happening.

Try it out with p = 2. When you put 2 in for p, n = 1,273 – 4(2) or 1,265.

So, when p = 2, n = 1,265. In other words, at $2 a slice, the cafeteria sells
1,265 slices.

When p = 3, n = 1,261, so at $3 a slice, the cafeteria sells 1,261 slices.

When p = 4, n = 1,257, so at $4 a slice, the cafeteria sells 1,257 slices.

Now, use POE. First of all, is the cafeteria selling more pizza as the price
goes up? No, as the price of pizza goes up, the cafeteria sells fewer slices of
pizza. That means you can eliminate (C) and (D).

Choice (A) says that for every $4 the price goes down, the cafeteria sells 1
more slice of pizza. Does your plugging in back that up? No. The cafeteria
sells 8 more slices of pizza when the price drops from $4 to $2, so it will
sell 16 more slices of pizza when the price drops by $4, and (A) is no good.
Now take a look at (B). Does the cafeteria sell 4 more slices of pizza for
every dollar the price drops? Yes! The correct answer is (B).



Here are the steps for solving meaning in context questions. The first three
steps are often enough, but plug in when they aren’t.


                             Meaning in Context

          1. Read the question carefully. Make sure you
             know which part of the equation you are being
             asked to identify.
          2. Use your scratch paper to rewrite the equation, replacing
             the parts of the equation you can identify with labels.
          3. Eliminate any answer choices that clearly describe the
             wrong part of the equation, or go against what you have
             labeled.
          4. Plug in! Use your own numbers to start seeing what is
             happening in the equation.
          5. Use POE again, using the information you learned from
             plugging in real numbers, until you can get it down to one
             answer choice. Or get it down to as few choices as you
             can, and guess.


Let’s look at a slightly different one now.




 12.     Mark for Review

                                 7x + y = 133
      Jeffrey has set a monthly budget for purchasing frozen blended mocha
      drinks from his local coffee shop. The equation above can be used to
      model the amount of his budget, y, in dollars, that remains after buying
      coffee for x days in a month. What does it mean that (19, 0) is a
      solution to this equation?

         A Jeffrey starts the month with a budget of $19.

         B Jeffrey spends $19 on coffee every day.

         C It takes 19 days for Jeffrey to drink 133 cups of coffee.

         D It takes 19 days for Jeffrey to run out of money in his budget
            for purchasing coffee.


Here’s How to Crack It
The question asks about a point that is the solution to an equation in the
context of the situation. Start by labeling the x and the y in the equation to
keep track of what they stand for. Use your scratch paper to replace x with
“days” and y with “budget.” So 7 × days + budget = 133. Hmm, still not very
clear, is it? One way to approach this is to plug in the point. If x = days = 19
when y = budget = 0, then Jeffrey will have no budget left after 19 days. This
matches (D).

If you have trouble seeing this, you can use the answer choices to help you
plug in. If (A) is true, the budget at the start of the month, when days = 0, is
$19. Plug these values into the equation to see if it is true. Is 7 × 0 + 19 =
133? Not at all, so eliminate (A). If (B) is true, Jeffrey drinks a lot of coffee!
Try some numbers and see if it works. For x = 1, the equation becomes 7(1)
+ y = 133 or y = 126, and for x = 2, it is 7(2) + y = 133 or y = 119. The
difference in y, the budget remaining, is 126 – 119 = 7, so that’s not $19 per
day. Eliminate (B) so only (C) and (D) remain. These both have 19 for the
number of days, and the point (19, 0) would indicate that 19 is the x-value, or
days. If you saw that right away—great! That would allow you to skip right
to testing (C) and (D).

For (C), you can plug in 19 for days in the equation to get 7 × 19 + budget =
133, or budget = 0. Does that tell you how many cups of coffee Jeffrey
drank? You have no information about the cost of a single cup of coffee, so
the answer can’t be (C). It does tell you, however, that after 19 days, Jeffrey
has no budget left. The correct answer is (D).

You might have noticed that the equation in this question could have been
graphed in the xy-plane, which could help you visualize the situation. Some
Digital SAT questions ask about the meaning of a piece of a linear graph, so
keep the meaning in context approach in mind when you get to the Functions
and Graphs chapter.
Other Digital SAT Algebra Strategies
Drill
Work these algebra questions using Plugging In or PITA. Answers and
explanations can be found starting on this page.

  1.       Mark for Review
       The length of a certain rectangle is twice the width. If the area of the
       rectangle is 128, what is the length of the rectangle?

          A4

          B8

          C 16

          D


  2.       Mark for Review
       If xy < 0, which of the following must be true?

         I. x + y = 0
        II. 2y – 2x < 0
       III. x2 + y2 > 0

          A I only

          B III only

          C I and III

          D II and III
3.        Mark for Review

     If           , what is the value of x?

          A4

          B 16

          C

          D 32


4.        Mark for Review



     If k = 3, which of the following contains all possible solutions to the
     equation above?

          A –2

          B2

          C 2 and 6

          D6


5.        Mark for Review
     If Alex can fold 12 napkins in x minutes, how many napkins can he fold
     in y hours?

          A


          B
       C


       D


6.      Mark for Review
     Nails are sold in 8-ounce and 20-ounce boxes. If 50 boxes of nails
     were sold and the total weight of the nails sold was less than 600
     ounces, what is the greatest possible number of 20-ounce boxes that
     could have been sold?

       A 16

       B 17

       C 25

       D 33


7.      Mark for Review
     In a certain school, 55% of the students sing in the choir. Of those who
     do not sing in the choir, 80% play in the band. If all students at the
     school participate in exactly one musical activity, what percentage of
     the students in the school participate in a musical activity other than
     singing in the choir or playing in the band?

       A 9%

       B 11%

       C 36%

       D 44%
 8.      Mark for Review
      The equation ax2 – 12x + 12 = 0 has exactly one solution for which of
      the following values of constant a?

        A –3

        B –2

        C2

        D3


 9.      Mark for Review
      A gas station sells regular gasoline for $2.39 per gallon and premium
      gasoline for $2.79 per gallon. If the gas station sold a total of 550
      gallons of both types of gasoline in one day for a total of $1,344.50,
      how many gallons of premium gasoline were sold?

        A 25

        B 75

        C 175

        D 475


10.      Mark for Review
      On a test, all right answers are worth the same number of points and all
      wrong answers are worth the same number of points. The equation 25C
      – 20W = 400 represents the number of right answers, C, and wrong
      answers, W, a student had on a test when the student earned a total of
      400 points. The point value of a right answer is how much more than
      the point value of a wrong answer?
A 20

B 25

C 45

D 80
CHAPTER DRILL ANSWERS AND
EXPLANATIONS
Other Digital SAT Algebra Strategies Drill
1.   C

     The question asks for the length of the rectangle. This is a specific
     value, and there are numbers in the answer choices, so plug in the
     answers. If you start with (B), the length is 8, and the width is half that,
     or 4. Area is length × width. The area of this rectangle is 8 × 4, which
     is nowhere near 128. Eliminate (A) and (B), as both are too small. Try
     (C). If the length is 16, the width is 8. So, does 128 = 16 × 8? Yes, it
     does! Since this matches the information in the question, stop here. The
     correct answer is (C).

2.   B

     The question asks which statements must be true. A question with
     unknown variables indicates a good place to plug in. You need numbers
     for x and y that will give you a negative product. Try x = 1 and y = –2.
     If you plug these into the statements in the Roman numerals, you find
     that (I) is false, but (II) and (III) are true. You can eliminate any answer
     choice that contains (I). This leaves (B) and (D). Now try different
     numbers to see if you can eliminate another choice. If you try x = –1
     and y = 2, you find that (II) is false and (III) is still true. The correct
     answer is (B).

3.   D

     The question asks for the value of x. This is a specific amount, and
     there are numbers in the answer choices, so plug in the answers,
     starting with (B). If x = 16, the left side of the equation is             .

     Does that equal       ? No—it’s too small. Choice (C) seems tough to
     work with, so try (D) next. If it is too big, (C) is your answer. For (D),
     x = 32, and the left side of the equation becomes

                                     . It’s a match. The correct answer is (D).

4.   B

     The question asks for the possible solutions to an equation. Since the
     question asks for a specific value and the answers contain numbers in
     increasing order, plug in the answers. Write the answers on the scratch
     paper, label them as “x,” and start with a number that appears more
     than once in the answers, such as 2. Plug x = 2 and k = 3 into the
     equation to get                    , which becomes             , then
           , and finally 1 = 1. This is true, so eliminate (A) and (D) because
     they do not include 2. Try 6 next, and plug x = 6 and k = 3 into the
     equation to get                  , which becomes                 , then
              , and finally 3 = –3. (On the Digital SAT, the square root of a
     number is always positive.) This is not true, so eliminate (C). The
     correct answer is (B).

5.   C

     The question asks for the number of napkins that can be folded in y
     hours. The two variables tell you this is a great place to plug in. Pick
     numbers that make the math easy. You can try x = 30 and y = 2. So in 2
     hours there are 4 periods of 30 minutes each: 12 × 4 = 48. Alex can
     fold 48 napkins in 2 hours, so 48 is your target. Plug the values for x
     and y into the answer choices to see which one matches the target. Only
     (C) works, so the correct answer is (C).

6.   A

     The question asks for the greatest possible number of 20-ounce boxes.
     Because this is a specific amount and there are numbers in the answer
     choices, this is a perfect opportunity to use PITA. Start with (C). If
     there are twenty-five 20-ounce boxes, then there are twenty-five 8-
     ounce boxes because a total of 50 boxes was purchased. In this case,
     the twenty-five 20-ounce boxes weigh 500 ounces, and the twenty-five
     8-ounce boxes weigh 200 ounces; the total is 700 ounces. This is too
     big because the question says the total weight was less than 600. If (C)
     is too big, (D) must also be too big; eliminate both answers. If you try
     (B), the total weight is 604 ounces, which is still too big. Thus, the
     correct answer is (A).

7.   A

     The question asks for a percentage. No specific values are given, so
     plug in. Since percent means “out of 100,” plug in 100 for the total
     number of students to make the math easy. Next, work the steps of the
     question one at a time. The question states that 55% of the students

     sing in the choir, so 55 of the 100 students sing in the choir. Read
     carefully: the next step refers to those who do not sing in the choir. If
     55 sing in the choir, 100 – 55 = 45 do not sing in the choir. Take 80%,

     or     , of those 45 students to get              students who play in

     the band. That leaves 100 – 55 – 36 = 9 students who participate in a
     musical activity other than choir or band. As a result of plugging in

     100, there is no need to do math to convert to a percentage: 9 out of 100
     is 9%. The correct answer is (A).

8.   D

     The question asks for the value of a constant in a quadratic equation.
     One way to solve the question is to work with the discriminant, which
     you learned about in Chapter 21. However, the built-in calculator or a
     personal graphing calculator, combined with plugging in the answers,
     will get the question right faster. Start with (C), and plug in 2 for a. The
     equation becomes 2x2 – 12x + 12 = 0. Enter the left side of the equation
     into the built-in calculator. There are two dots where the graph
     intersects the x-axis, which means the quadratic has two solutions.
     Eliminate (C). It might not be obvious whether a bigger or smaller
     number is needed, but it won’t take long to try other numbers. Try (B)
     and replace 2 with –2 in the equation. The calculator shows that the
     quadratic again has two solutions; eliminate (B). Try (D) and replace –
     2 with 3. The quadratic now has one solution at (2, 0). The correct
     answer is (D).

9.   B

     The question asks for the number of gallons of premium gasoline that
     were sold. When asked for a specific value, try plugging in the
     answers. Label them as gallons of premium and start with the value in
     (B). If 75 gallons of premium were sold, the station would make
     75($2.79) = $209.25 for those sales. A total of 550 gallons was sold,
     so the station would have sold 550 – 75 = 475 gallons of regular
     gasoline. The sales for the regular gasoline would be 475($2.39) =
     $1,135.25. The total sales for both types of gasoline would be $209.25
   + $1,135.25 = $1,344.50. That matches the information in the question,
   so the correct answer is (B).

10. C

   The question asks for the relationship between two values in an
   equation. It will help to understand what the parts of the equation
   represent, so label parts of the equation and rewrite it. The question
   states that C represents the number of right answers, W represents the
   number of wrong answers, and 400 represents the total number of
   points. Rewrite the equation as 25(number of right answers) –
   20(number of wrong answers) = (total number of points). Thus, 25 and
   –20 must represent the number of points earned for each right and
   wrong answer, respectively. To determine how much more a right
   answer is worth than a wrong answer, subtract the values to get 25 – (–
   20) = 45. The correct answer is (C).
Summary
 When an algebra question asks for a specific amount and has numbers in
 the answer choices, plug each of the answer choices into the problem
 until you find one that works.

 If you start with one of the middle numbers, you may be able to cut your
 work. The answer choices will be in order, so if your number is too high
 or too low, you’ll know what to eliminate.

 When the question has variables in the answer choices, you can often
 plug in your own amounts for the unknowns and do arithmetic instead of
 algebra.

 When you plug in, use “good” numbers—ones that are simple to work
 with and that make the problem easier to manipulate: 2, 5, 10, or 100 are
 generally easy numbers to use.

 On meaning in context questions, label the parts of the equation with
 information from the question, and eliminate answers that don’t match
 the labels.

 Plugging In can also be used on meaning in context questions. If labeling
 the answers and using Process of Elimination isn’t enough to answer the
 question, plug your own amounts into the equation so you can start to see
 what is going on.
Chapter 23
Functions and Graphs
The Digital SAT includes a large number of questions about functions, either
by themselves or connected to a graph. Some of these questions can get quite
complicated, but the same basic concepts apply no matter what. This chapter
will give you the tools you need to work on questions about functions and
understand how functions and graphs are connected.
CALL ON THE CALCULATOR
A complete understanding of a graphing calculator can make a significant
difference in how long it takes to answer questions about the graphs of
functions. Try solving the examples with the built-in calculator or your own
to discover how powerful it can be. Some questions cannot be solved by the
graphing calculator, however, so it’s also important to understand the
concepts covered in this chapter.


FUNCTION FUNDAMENTALS
Think of a function as just a machine for producing ordered pairs. You put in
one number and the machine spits out another. Think of these as the input and
the output. An input value, x, gets put into the function machine, f, and an
output value, y, comes out of the function machine. The most common
function is an f(x) function. A simple way to keep functions straight is to
remember that f(x) = y.

Let’s look at a question.




   1.      Mark for Review
        If f (x) = x3 – 4x + 8, what is the value of f (5)?

           A 67

           B 97

           C 113

           D 147
                 What’s This?
                 Anytime you see the notation f(x), know that f isn’t a
                 variable; it’s the name of the function. When you say
                 it out loud, it’s “f of x.” Though f(x) is the most
                 common way to show that an equation is a
                 mathematic function, any letter can be used. So you
                 may see g(x) or h(d). Know that you’re still dealing
                 with a function.



Here’s How to Crack It
The question asks for the value of f(5) for the given function. Any time you
see a number inside the parentheses, such as f(5), plug in that number for x.
The question is actually telling you to use Plugging In! Let’s do it:

                               f(5) = 53 – 4(5) + 8
                               f(5) = 125 – 20 + 8
                               f(5) = 113

The correct answer is (C).



The previous question gave you a number to put into the function, which
made it a Plugging In question. If the question gives you information about
what comes out of the function and asks what should go in, it’s a PITA
question!

Here’s an example of using PITA on a function question.




  2.    Mark for Review
     For what value of x does f (x) = 12 if the function f is defined as f (x) =

             ?

        A5

        B8

        C 20

        D 24




                 Use PITA!
                 Don’t forget that you can often plug in the answer
                 choices on function questions! Noticing a pattern
                 yet? Just a few easy tricks can unlock a lot of easy
                 points.



Here’s How to Crack It
The question asks for the input value of a function that results in a specific

output value. The answer choices contain numbers in increasing order, and
one of them must be the input that will result in an output of 12. Plug in the

answers. Rewrite the answer choices on the scratch paper and label them
“x.” Next, start with one of the middle numbers. Try (B), 8. Plug x = 8 into
the function to get                  , or f(8) = 4 + 2, and finally f(8) = 6. This

does not match the output value of 12, so eliminate (B). The result was too
small, so try a larger number and plug in x = 20. The function becomes
                  , or f(20) = 10 + 2, and finally f(20) = 12. This matches the

output value of 12, so stop here. The correct answer is (C).

In this case, it would have been possible to set the function equal to 12 and
solve for x. However, solving will be difficult on more complicated
problems, and it’s easy to make mistakes with algebra. PITA is always a
good idea when a question gives the output of a function and asks for the
input.



Now that you know the basics of functions on the Digital SAT, try the next
one.




  3.      Mark for Review
       If f (x) = x2 + 2, which of the following could be a value of f (x)?

          A –1

          B0

          C1

          D2


Here’s How to Crack It
The question asks for a possible value of the function. Therefore, the
question is asking which of these values could be spit out of the f(x) machine.
Think about what is going in. No matter what you put in as a value for x, the
value of x2 has to be positive or zero. So, the lowest possible value of x2 + 2
is 2. The correct answer is (D).

Note that you could also approach this question by plugging in the answers. If
you plugged in 1 for f(x), for instance, you would get 1 = x2 + 2, which
becomes x2 = –1, which is impossible.



Sometimes you’ll get more complicated questions. As long as you know that
when you put in x, your function will spit out another number, you’ll be fine.
Now try another one.




  4.      Mark for Review
       What is the value of c if g(x) = 4x2 – 6 and g(x – c) = 4x2 + 40x + 94?

         A –40

         B –5

         C5

         D 40


Here’s How to Crack It
The question asks for the value of c. In function notation, the number inside
the parentheses is the x-value that goes into the function. This question might
seem complicated, but look beyond the math and use your Princeton Review
Digital SAT knowledge. The question asks for a specific value and has
numbers in the answers, so try PITA! Label the answer choices as “c” and
start in the middle with (C), 5. Plug c = 5 into the question, and the value to
put into the function becomes x – 5.
                            g(x – 5) = 4(x – 5)2 – 6

FOIL the quadratic to get

                        g(x – 5) = 4(x2 – 10x + 25) – 6

Distribute and combine like terms to get

                        g(x – 5) = 4x2 – 40x + 100 – 6
                          g(x – 5) = 4x2 – 40x + 94

Set the results equal to the quadratic given in the question.

                       4x2 – 40x + 94 = 4x2 + 40x + 94

This is not true, so eliminate (C). The middle term has the right coefficient
but the wrong sign, so try (B), –5. The function becomes

                            g(x + 5) = 4(x + 5)2 – 6

Carry out the same steps as before to get

                        g(x + 5) = 4(x2 + 10x + 25) – 6
                        g(x + 5) = 4x2 + 40x + 100 – 6
                           g(x + 5) = 4x2 + 40x + 94

This is equal to the quadratic given in the question, so –5 is the value of c.
The correct answer is (B).



Sometimes you may see a word problem that describes a function and then
asks you to “build a function” that describes the real-world situation
presented in the question. Take the following question, for example.
   5.      Mark for Review
        Rock climbing routes are rated on a numbered scale with the highest
        number representing the most difficult route. Sally tried a range of shoe
        sizes on each of several routes of varying difficulty and found that when
        she wore smaller shoes, she could climb routes of greater difficulty. If
        D represents the difficulty rating of a route Sally successfully climbed
        and s represents the size of the shoes she wore on such a route, then
        which of the following could express D as a function of s?

          A D(s) = s2

          B D(s) =

          C D(s) = s – 3.5

          D D(s) =


Here’s How to Crack It
The question asks for a function that best represents a situation. Start by
thinking about the relationship described in the question: the smaller the
shoes, the greater the difficulty. This is an inverse relationship. So, look for
an inverse function. Only (D) expresses this type of relationship because a
greater value of s leads to a smaller value of D.

If you aren’t sure, try plugging in numbers to try it out. Plug in s = 8 and then
s = 10 to see if the result for D is smaller when you use a larger shoe size.
Since only (D) results in a smaller difficulty for a larger shoe size, the
correct answer is (D).



One way the test-writers will make functions more complicated is to use
percentages. Use your knowledge of function basics from this chapter and of
percentages from earlier in this book to work through these questions.

Try this example.




   6.      Mark for Review
        For every increase in the value of x by 1 in function z, the value of z(x)
        increases by 25%. Which of the following functions defines z if z(1) =
        12.5?

           A z(x) = 10(1.25)x

           B z(x) = 1.25(10)x

           C z(x) = 0.75(10)x

           D z(x) = 10(0.75)x


Here’s How to Crack It
The question asks for the equation that defines a function. Recall that, in
function notation, the number inside the parentheses is the x-value that goes
into the function, or the input, and the value that comes out of the function is
the y-value, or the output. The question provides a pair of input and output
values by stating that z(1) = 12.5. Plug x = 1 into the answer choices and
eliminate answers that do not result in z(1) = 12.5. These are the results:

        A) z(1) = 10(1.25)1
           z(1) = 10(1.25)
           z(1) = 12.5
           Keep (A).
        B) z(1) = 1.25(10)1
           z(1) = 1.25(10)
        z(1) = 12.5
        Keep (B).
     C) z(1) = 0.75(10)1
        z(1) = 0.75(10)
        z(1) = 7.5
        Eliminate (C).
     D) z(1) = 10(0.75)1
        z(1) = 10(0.75)
        z(1) = 7.5
        Eliminate (D).

Two answers worked, so try a different value. The question states that for
every increase in the value of x by 1 in function z, the value of z(x)

increases by 25%. Increase the input value by 1 to get x = 1 + 1 = 2. When x

= 1, z(x) = 12.5, so when x = 2, z(x) will increase by 25%. Take the value of

z(1), which is 12.5, and add 25% of it. Percent means out of 100, so

translate 25% as     . Thus,                          , or z(2) = 15.625. The

other option is to use the built-in calculator, which automatically translates

the % symbol and adds the word “of” to multiply the percent by the next

number you enter. Either way, the target value for z(2) is 15.625. Plug x = 2

into the remaining answer choices:

     A) z(2) = 10(1.25)2
        z(2) = 10(1.5625)
        z(2) = 15.625
        Keep (A).
     B) z(2) = 1.25(10)2
        z(2) = 1.25(100)
        z(2) = 125
        Eliminate (B).

Only one answer remains, so it must be correct. If the functions in the answer
choices look familiar, that’s because they are in the form of the growth and
decay formula you learned about in Chapter 21: final amount = original
amount (1 ± rate)number of changes. In correct answer (A), z(x) is the final
amount, 10 is the original amount, 0.25 is the rate, and x is the number of
changes. But don’t worry if you didn’t catch that: plugging in values from the
question was all you needed to do to get this one right. The correct answer is
(A).



Functions and Tables
There is one more way the test-writers will test you on input and output
values in a function, and that’s by putting the values into a table. Stick to the
basics of functions and look for chances to plug in.

Take a look at the following example.




   7.    Mark for Review

                         x                  f (x)
                         1                   8
                         2                   17
                         3                   26
                         4                   35
     Linear function f is represented in the table above, which shows four
     values of x and their corresponding values of f (x). Which of the
     following functions accurately represents function f?

         A f (x) = 8x

         B f (x) = 8x + 8

         C f (x) = 9x – 1

         D f (x) = 9x + 8


Here’s How to Crack It
The question asks for the function that represents values given in a table.
Apply the function basics: x is the input, and f(x), which is equivalent to y, is
the output of the function. The table shows pairs of values for x and f(x), and
the correct function must work for every pair of values. Plug in values from
the table and eliminate functions that don’t work. Plug in x = 1 and f(x) = 8 to
get the following results:

     A) 8 = 8(1), or 8 = 8
        True, so keep (A).
     B) 8 = 8(1) + 8, or 8 = 16
        Not true; eliminate (B).
     C) 8 = 9(1) – 1, or 8 = 8
        True, so keep (C).
     D) 8 = 9(1) + 8, or 8 = 17
        Not true; eliminate (D).

Two answers worked for the first pair of input and output values, so try a
second pair from the table. Plug x = 2 and y = 17 into the remaining answers
to get these results:

     A) 17 = 8(2), or 17 = 16
        Not true; eliminate (A).
     C) 17 = 9(2) – 1, or 17 = 17
        True, so keep (C).

The only answer that worked both times must be correct, so don’t spend time
trying the other two points. The correct answer is (C).



What’s the Point?
Why did math folks come up with functions? To graph them, of course! When
you put in a value for x, and your machine (or function) spits out another
number, that’s your y. You now have an ordered pair. Functions are just
another way to express graphs. Knowing the connection between functions
and graphs is useful, because you will most likely see questions involving
graphs on the Digital SAT.


THE COORDINATE PLANE
A coordinate plane, or the xy-plane, is made up of two number lines that
intersect at a right angle. The horizontal number line is called the x-axis, and
the vertical number line is the y-axis.

The four areas formed by the intersection of the axes are called quadrants.
The location of any point can be described with a pair of numbers (x, y), just
the way you would describe a point on a map: (0, 0) are the coordinates of
the intersection of the two axes (also called the origin); (1, 2) are the
coordinates of the point one space to the right and two spaces up; (–1, 5) are
the coordinates of the point one space to the left and five spaces up; (–4, –2)
are the coordinates of the point four spaces to the left and two spaces down.
All of these points are located on the following figure.
               Quadrants
               A coordinate plane has four distinct areas known as
               quadrants. The quadrants are numbered
               counterclockwise, starting from the top right. They
               help determine generally whether x and y are
               positive or negative. Sometimes knowing what
               quadrant a point is in and what that means is all you
               need to find the answer.




Some of the questions on the Digital SAT may require you to know certain
properties of lines on the xy-plane. Let’s talk about them.

               Ways to Remember
               Having trouble remembering that the x-coordinate
               comes before the y-coordinate in an ordered pair?
               Just remember the phrase “x before y, walk before
               you fly.” The letter x also comes before y in the
               dictionary.



POINTS ON A LINE
You may be asked if a point is on a line or on the graph of any other equation.
Just plug the coordinates of the point into the equation of the line to determine
if that point makes the equation a true statement.




   8.      Mark for Review
        In the xy-plane, which of the following ordered pairs is a point on the
        line y = 2x – 6?

          A (6, 7)

          B (7, 7)

          C (7, 8)

          D (8, 7)


Here’s How to Crack It
The question asks for a point that is on the given line. Plug in the answers,
starting with (B). The (x, y) point is (7, 7), so plug in 7 for x and 7 for y. The
equation becomes 7 = 2(7) – 6 or 7 = 8. This isn’t true, so eliminate (B). The
result was very close to a true statement, and the point in (C) has the same x-
coordinate and a larger y-coordinate, so try that next. Because 8 = 2(7) – 6,
the correct answer is (C).




SLOPE
You always read a graph from left to right. As you read the graph, how much
the line goes up or down is known as the slope. Slope is the rate of change of
a line and is commonly known as “rise over run.” It’s denoted by the letter m.
Essentially, it’s the change in the y-coordinates over the change in the x-
coordinates and can be found with the following formula:




This formula uses the points (x1, y1) and (x2, y2). For example, if you have the
points (2, 3) and (7, 4), the slope of the line created by these points would be




So the slope of a line with points (2, 3) and (7, 4) would be , which means

that every time you go up 1 unit, you travel to the right 5 units.


EQUATIONS OF A LINE
Slope-Intercept Form
The equation of a line can take multiple forms. The most common of these is
known as the slope-intercept form. If you know the slope and the y-
intercept, you can create the equation of a given line. A slope-intercept
equation takes the form y = mx + b, where m is the slope and b is the y-
intercept (the point where the function crosses the y-axis).

Let’s say that you know that a certain line has a slope of 5

                           and a y-intercept of 3. The equation of the line

would be y = 5x + 3. You could graph this line simply by looking at this form

of the equation. First, draw the y-intercept, (0, 3). Next, plug in a number for
x and solve for y to get a coordinate pair of a point on the line. Then connect
the point you just found with the y-intercept you already drew, and voilà, you
have a line. If you want more points, you can create a table such as the

following:

                               x              y
                              –2             –7
                              –1             –2
                               0              3
                               1              8

Take a look at the finished product:




One way the Digital SAT can test your understanding of lines is to show you
a graph and ask you which equation describes that graph.

Here’s an example.
  9.      Mark for Review




       Which of the following could be the equation of the line represented in
       the graph above?

         A y = –2x – 1

         B y = –2x + 4

         C y = 2x – 4

         D y = 2x + 4


Here’s How to Crack It
The question asks for the equation of a line based on the graph. Remember
that the equation of a line is y = mx + b, where m is the slope and b is the y-
intercept. Look at the graph and think about what the equation should look
like. Since the line is sloping downward, it should have a negative slope, so
you can eliminate (C) and (D). Next, since the line has a positive y-intercept,
you can eliminate (A). The correct answer is (B).



Standard Form
Another way the equation of a line can be written is the standard form of Ax
+ By = C, where A, B, and C are constants and A and B do not equal zero.
The test-writers will sometimes present equations in this form in the hopes
that you will waste time putting it in slope-intercept form. If you know what
to look for, the standard form can be just as useful as the slope-intercept
form.



                        In standard form Ax + By = C:

            the slope of the line is

            the y-intercept of the line is

            the x-intercept of the line is



The equation y = 5x + 3 in the previous example would be –5x + y = 3 when
written in the standard form. Using the information above, you can see that:

                              slope =


                              y-intercept =


                            x-intercept =

The answers for the slope and the y-intercept were the same as when the
slope-intercept form was used. Depending on the form of the equation in the
question or in the answers, knowing these line equation facts can help save
time on the test.

Let’s look at how this may be tested.
 10.        Mark for Review

       The graph of which of the following equations is parallel to the line

       with equation                 ?

            A x– y=3

            B x – 3y = 2

            C x + 6y = 4

            D x + 3y = 5


Here’s How to Crack It
The question asks for the equation of a line that has a slope parallel to the

slope of the line given. In the form y = mx + b, m represents the slope. The

equation in the question is in that form, so the slope is         . Parallel lines

have equal slopes, so all you need to do now is find the answer choice that

also has a slope of        .


One way to do that would be to rewrite each answer in the y = mx + b form.
However, notice that the equations in the answer choices are in the Ax + By =

C form, and in that form the slope is equal to          . Find the slope of each

answer choice, and eliminate the ones that are not        . The slope of the line

in (A) is             . This is not the correct slope, so eliminate (A). The slope
of the line in (B) is            . This is also the wrong slope, so eliminate (B).

The slope of the line in (C) is             , which is also the wrong slope, so

eliminate (C). The slope of the line in (D) is             . This is the same slope as

the line given in the question. The correct answer is (D).




PARALLEL AND PERPENDICULAR LINES
So now you know that parallel lines have the same slope. Whenever the

Digital SAT brings up perpendicular lines, just remember that a
perpendicular line has a slope that is the negative reciprocal of the other
line’s slope. For instance, if the slope of a line is 3, then the slope of a line

perpendicular to it would be         . Combine this with the skills you’ve already

learned to work on a question about perpendicular lines.


                  Parallel vs. Perpendicular
                  Parallel lines have the same slope and never
                  intersect. Perpendicular lines have slopes that are
                  negative reciprocals and intersect at a right angle.


Here’s an example.




 11.      Mark for Review
       Which of the following is the graph of a line perpendicular to the line
       defined by the equation 2x + 5y = 10?
Here’s How to Crack It
The question asks for a line perpendicular to the line 2x + 5y = 10.
Therefore, you need to find the slope of the line and then take the negative
reciprocal to find the slope of the perpendicular line. You can convert the

equation into the y = mx + b format in order to find the slope, or simply
remember that when an equation is presented in the form Ax + By = C, the
slope is equal to      . So the slope of this line is            , and the slope of a

perpendicular line would be .

Look at the answer choices for one with a positive (upward) slope. Choices
(B) and (C) slope downward, so eliminate them. Next, use points in the
graph to find the slope of each answer. Eliminate (A); it has points at (1, 0)
and (2, 5), for a slope of 5—too steep. The only remaining choice is (D), so
the correct answer is (D).




TWO EQUATIONS WITH INFINITELY MANY
SOLUTIONS
In the previous chapters on algebra, we discussed equations with one or
multiple solutions. Now imagine an equation in which any value of x would
create a viable solution to the equation.

                                   x+3=x+3

In this case, it is fairly obvious that any number you choose to put in for x
will create a true equation. But what does it mean when two lines have
infinitely many solutions? Let’s look at an example.




                 To Infinity…and Beyond!
                 When given two equations with infinitely many
                 solutions, find a way to make them equal. The
                 equations represent the same line.



 12.     Mark for Review
                                   gx – hy = 78
                                 4x + 3y = 13

     In the system of equations above, g and h are constants. If the system
     has infinitely many solutions, what is the value of gh?

        A –432

        B –6

        C6

        D 432


Here’s How to Crack It
The question asks for the value of gh, where g and h are coefficients in the
system of equations. This question may have you scratching your head and
moving on to the next question, but explore what you can do to solve this
before you decide it’s not worth your time. You may be surprised by how
easy it is to solve a problem like this.

When they say that these equations have infinitely many solutions, what they
are really saying is that these are the same equation, or that one equation is a
multiple of the other equation. In other words, these two equations represent
the same line. With that in mind, try to determine what needs to be done to
make these equations equal. Since the right side of the equation is dealing
with only a constant, first determine what you would need to do to make 13
equal to 78.

In this case, you need to multiply 13 by 6. Since you are working with
equations, you need to do the same thing to both sides of the equation in order
for the equation to remain equal.

                             6(4x + 3y) = 6 × 13

                                24x + 18y = 78
Since both equations are now equal to 78, you can set them equal to each
other, giving you this equation:

                             24x + 18y = gx – hy

You may know that when you have equations with the same variables on each
side, the coefficients on those variables must be equal, so you can deduce
that g = 24 and h = –18. (Be cautious when you evaluate this equation. The
test-writers are being sneaky by using addition in one equation and
subtraction in another.) Therefore, gh equals 24 × –18 = –432. The correct
answer is (A).




TWO EQUATIONS WITH NO SOLUTIONS
You saw above that a system of equations can have infinitely many solutions.
When solving equations, you likely assume, as most people do, that there
will be at least one solution to the equation, but that is not always the case.
Look at the following example.

                                3x – 6 = 3x + 7

If you solve this equation, you will find that –6 = 7. Since –6 can never equal
7, there is no value of x that can be put into this equation to make it true. In
this case, the equation has no solutions.

What does it mean if two equations of lines have no solutions? Here’s one to
try.




 13.     Mark for Review
     Which of the following accurately represents the set of solutions for the

     lines 6x + 12y = –24 and                       ?

        A (0, –4)

        B (0, 4)

        C There are no solutions.

        D There are infinitely many solutions.

                   There’s Just No Solution
                   When given two equations with no solutions, find a
                   way to compare slopes. The equations represent
                   parallel lines.



Here’s How to Crack It
The question asks for the solution to the system of equations. If the lines
intersect, this will be the point of intersection. The answers in (C) and (D),
though, suggest that the lines may be the same or parallel. Rather than
plugging in the points in (A) and (B), look for a way to compare slopes. Start
by putting the first line into y = mx + b form: 12y = –6x – 24. Divide the

whole equation by 12, so                        . Since these lines have the same

slope but different y-intercepts, the lines are parallel, and they will never

intersect. Therefore, the correct answer is (C).

If two lines had different slopes, the lines would intersect at a single point
such as (A) or (B). If the equations were identical, then they would be the
same line and therefore have infinitely many solutions.




POINTS OF INTERSECTION
Earlier in this book you learned how to find the solution to a system of
equations. There are several ways to do this, including stacking up the
equations and adding or subtracting, setting them equal, or even plugging in
the answers. The Digital SAT may also ask about the intersection of the
graphs of two equations in the xy-plane, which is a similar idea.

Let’s try one.




 14.      Mark for Review
       In the xy-plane, which of the following is a point of intersection
       between the graphs of y = x + 2 and y = x2 + x – 2?

          A (0, –2)

          B (0, 2)

          C (1, 0)

          D (2, 4)


Here’s How to Crack It
The question asks for the point of intersection for two equations. This is a
point that is on the graphs of both equations. Therefore, the point would work
if plugged into the equation of the line and the equation of the parabola.
                 Here’s how you would apply PITA in a point of
                 intersection question.


So, use PITA by testing the answer choices: start with one of the answers in
the middle and plug the point into each equation to see if it is true. The
correct point of intersection will work in both functions. Try (C) in the first
equation: does 0 = (1) + 2? No. So, (C) is not the answer. Try (D) in the first
equation: does 4 = (2) + 2? Yes. So, try (D) in the second equation: does 4 =
(2)2 + 2 – 2? Yes. Since (2, 4) works in both equations, the correct answer is
(D).




CALL ON THE CALCUATOR
It’s good to know the concepts and math behind the graphs of lines and the
way they’re tested on the Digital SAT. It’s also good to know how to use the
built-in graphing calculator or your own that you bring with you on test day.
Go back to some of the previous examples and try them again using a
graphing calculator (if you didn’t use it the first time). You might be
surprised by how easy some of them are to answer.


        y = f(x)
        Sometimes, instead of seeing the typical y = mx + b equation,
        or something similar, you’ll see f(x) = mx + b. Look familiar?
        Graphs are just another way to show information from a
        function. Functions show information algebraically and
        graphs show functions geometrically (as pictured).
       Here’s an example. The function f(x) = 3x – 2 is shown
       graphically as the following:




       The reason the Digital SAT includes function questions is to
       test whether you can figure out the relationship between a
       function and its graph. To tackle these questions, you need to
       know that the independent variable, the x, is on the x-axis,
       and the dependent variable, the f(x), is on the y-axis. For
       example, if you see a function of f(x) = 7, then you need to
       understand that this is a graph of a horizontal line where y =
       7.


The rest of this chapter will deal with graphs of parabolas and circles
instead of straight lines. The graphing calculator is extremely useful on many
questions like this, and we’ll show you how to take advantage of it.


GRAPHING FUNCTIONS
One type of function question you might be asked is how the graph of a
function would shift if you added a value to it.

Here is a quick guide for the graph of f(x) = x2, as seen below:




For f(x) + c, where c is a constant, the graph will shift up c units, as shown in
the figure below:




Conversely, f(x) – c will shift the graph down by c units:
For f(x + c), the graph will shift c units to the left:




For f(x – c), the graph will shift to the right by c units:




You may have realized how easy these questions would become if you
simply put them into your graphing calculator.

You can also plug in points to find the correct graph.

You have several options for dealing with questions like this. You can know
the four rules for transforming graphs, you can plug in points to find the
correct graph, or you can use a graphing calculator. The built-in calculator
can graph the equation even if the test-writers give you an equation in an
unusual form.

Try the next one using the built-in graphing calculator or your own.
 15.      Mark for Review
       Function f can be graphed in the xy-plane by translating function g
       down 3 units. Function g is defined by g(x) = –2x3 + 4x2 – x + 2. What
       is the value of f (1)?




                                 Watch Us Crack It



Here’s How to Crack It
The question asks for the value of a function. Start by graphing the equation
of g(x). In the built-in calculator, enter g(x) = −2x3 + 4x2 – x + 2 into the first
entry field and you will see the graph in the graph display. The question asks
about f(1), so find the point where x = 1 on the graph of g(x). You might need
to scroll and zoom to see 1 on the x-axis, and use the mouse pointer to find
the y-value when x = 1. The point is at (1, 3). The question states that the
graph of function f is the graph of function g translated down 3 units. Count 3
units down from the point at (1, 3) in the graph of g(x) to get to a point at (1,
0). At this point, x = 1 and y = 0. Since f(x) = y, the value of f(1) is 0. The
correct answer is 0.




EQUATIONS OF A PARABOLA
Standard Form
The Digital SAT will ask questions using three different forms of the
equation for a parabola.


                The standard form of a parabola equation is

                               y = ax2 + bx + c


In the standard form of a parabola, the value of a tells whether a parabola
opens upward or downward (if a is positive, the parabola opens upward,
and if a is negative, the parabola opens downward).

Factored Form
We looked at equations for parabolas in Chapter 21 when we solved
quadratics. The factored form of a quadratic equation reveals the roots of the
parabola. These are also the solutions of x. Given a question about roots or
solutions, it can be helpful to know the relationship between the equation and
the graph of the parabola in the xy-plane.


                 The factored form of a parabola equation is

                             y = a(x – r1)(x – r2)

        In the factored form, r1 and r2 are the roots or x-intercepts of
                                 the parabola.


For the next question, the equation is y = x2 – 4x – 12. If you factored this,
you’d get y = (x + 2)(x – 6), and the roots would be at x = –2 and x = 6. You
can see that those are the exact points on the graph that the parabola crosses
the x-axis.
Vertex Form

                   The vertex form of a parabola equation is

                                y = a(x – h)2 + k

             In the vertex form, the point (h, k) is the vertex of the
                                    parabola.


In vertex form, the value of a still indicates which way the parabola opens.
The most useful feature of vertex form is that it shows the vertex of the
parabola, which is the minimum value of y when a > 0 or the maximum value
of y when a < 0. When the equation is not in vertex form, you’ll have to do
some work to find the vertex.

Here’s a typical question about the vertex of a parabola.




 16.      Mark for Review
       The function g is defined by g(x) = –x2 + 4x + 12. For what value of x
       does g(x) reach its maximum?




Here’s How to Crack It
The question asks for the value when a quadratic function reaches its
maximum. A parabola reaches its minimum or maximum value at its vertex,
so find the x-coordinate of the vertex. The simplest method is to enter the
equation into the built-in calculator, then scroll and zoom as needed to find
the vertex. The vertex is at (2, 16), so the value of the x-coordinate is 2.
There is also a way to find the x-coordinate using algebra. In vertex form, the
vertex is at (h, k). When a quadratic is in standard form, ax2 + bx + c, use the

formula           to find the x-coordinate of the vertex. The equation in this

question is in standard form, so a = –1, b = 4, and c = 12. The formula

becomes              , or           , and then h = 2. You don’t need this

formula to answer this question, but if you needed to solve for the y-
coordinate of the vertex, you could plug x = 2 back into the equation to get –
(2)2 + 4(2) + 12 = –4 + 8 + 12 = 16. This is the vertex of (2, 16) that you
found using the calculator.

Using either method, the correct answer is 2.



In the chapter on algebra, we showed you how the Digital SAT asks
questions about the number of solutions to a system of linear equations or a
quadratic. Review that to know the rules and how to use the discriminant.
However, the calculator provides additional options, and some of the other
skills you’ve learned in this book apply to questions about graphing too.

Think about using a calculator and apply what you’ve learned so far to the
following question.




 17.      Mark for Review
                                y = ax2 + 12.25

     In the system of equations above, a is a constant. If the system of
     equations has exactly one solution, what is the value of a?

         A –2.25

         B –1.5

         C 1.5

         D 2.25


Here’s How to Crack It
The question asks for the value of a constant in a system of equations. The
question asks for a specific value, and the answers contain numbers in
increasing order, so plug in the answers. Yes, PITA can work on graphing
questions, too! Start with an answer in the middle. Try (C), 1.5. Plug a = 1.5
into the second equation to get y = (1.5)(x2) + 12.25. Next, enter both
equations in the entry fields of the built-in graphing calculator and look at the
results in the graph display. Zoom out enough to see both the parabola and the
line clearly in the graph display (expanding the calculator window also
helps). If you click one of the equations, several gray dots will appear on the
graph. One shows the vertex of the parabola, and the other two show where
the line intersects the parabola.
The question states that the system of equations has exactly one solution, not
two, so eliminate (C). Next, try (D), 2.25. Keep the two equations you
already entered and change 1.5 to 2.25 in the second equation. Click on one
of the equations to see two gray dots: one is the vertex and the other is the
single point where the line intersects the graph. The system now has exactly
one solution, and the correct answer is (D).




EQUATION OF A CIRCLE
The Digital SAT will also ask questions about the equation of a circle in the
xy-plane.


       The equation of a circle is

                           (x – h)2 + (y – k)2 = r2
         In the circle equation, the center of the circle is the point (h,
         k), and the radius of the circle is r.


Let’s look at a question that tests the use of the circle equation.




 18.      Mark for Review
       Circle P in the xy-plane has the equation (x – 4)2 + (y + 1)2 = 9. Circle
       Q has the same radius as Circle P, but its center is 2 units to the left of
       that of Circle P. Which of the following is the equation of Circle Q?

          A (x – 4)2 + (y + 1)2 = 1

          B (x – 2)2 + (y + 1)2 = 9

          C (x – 6)2 + (y + 1)2 = 9

          D (x – 4)2 + (y + 3)2 = 9


Here’s How to Crack It
The question asks for an equation that represents a graph. The equation of a
circle in standard form is (x – h)2 + (y – k)2 = r2, where (h, k) is the center
and r is the radius. Since the equation of Circle P is (x – 4)2 + (y + 1)2 = 9,
the center is at (4, –1) and r2 = 9, so r = 3. The question states that Circle Q
has the same radius as Circle P, so the right side of the equation of Circle Q
should also be 32, or 9; eliminate (A) because it has an incorrect value for r2.
The center of Circle Q is 2 units to the left of the center of Circle P. Two
units to the left of (4, –1) is (2, –1), so the equation of Circle Q is (x – 2)2 +
(y + 1)2 = 9. The correct answer is (B).
On the last question, you could have graphed the original circle and the
circles in the answers. That would be time-consuming, though, and it was
easy to find the center given the equation in standard form. Some circle
questions are better cracked using a graphing calculator, either the built-in
calculator or your own. Try using a calculator to answer this question.




 19.      Mark for Review
       What is the radius of a circle graphed in the xy-plane and given by the
       equation 3x2 + 15x + 3y2 – 3y = 28.5?

         A3

         B4

         C

         D


Here’s How to Crack It
The question asks for the radius of a circle given an equation for its graph.
The equation is not given in standard form, so you cannot simply look at the
equation and determine the radius. One approach is to graph the equation.
Using the built-in calculator, enter the equation as given; the calculator will
graph the circle correctly even though the equation isn’t in standard form.
Click in the entry field or on the circle to see several gray dots.
Click the dots at the maximum and minimum y values to find the two ends of
the diameter. The maximum y-value is at (–2.5, 4.5), and the minimum y-
value is at (–2.5, –3.5). Because these points have the same x-coordinate, the
distance between them is the diameter of the circle. Find the difference to get
a diameter of 4.5 – (–3.5) = 8. The radius of a circle is half the diameter, so
the radius is 4.

The other way to solve for the radius is to convert the equation to standard
form. The equation in standard form of a circle in the xy-plane is

                            (x – h)2 + (y – k)2 = r2

where (h, k) is the center of the circle and r is the radius. The equation given
in the question is not in standard form. To put it into standard form, complete
the squares. Start by dividing the entire equation by 3 to remove the
coefficients on the x2 and y2 terms. This leaves

                            x2 + 5x + y2 – y = 9.5
Next, take half the coefficient on the x term, or 2.5, square it to get 6.25, and
add 6.25 to both sides. Now the equation is

                        x2 + 5x + 6.25 + y2 – y = 15.75

Do the same with the coefficient on the y term to get

                      x2 + 5x + 6.25 + y2 – y + 0.25 = 16

The standard form equation for this circle is thus

                          (x + 2.5)2 + (y – 0.5)2 = 16

The question didn’t ask for the center of the circle, so focus on the radius. If
r2 = 16, then r = 4.

Using a graphing calculator or completing the square, the correct answer is
(B).



Got all of that? Now test your knowledge of functions and graphing with the
following drills.
Functions and Graphs Drill
Use your new knowledge of functions, graphs, and coordinate geometry to
complete the questions. Answers and explanations can be found starting on
this page.

  1.      Mark for Review
       Function f is defined by f (x) = x2 – c, where c is a constant. If f (–2) =
       6, what is the value of c?

          A –10

          B –2

          C0

          D2


  2.      Mark for Review
       A farming crew harvests 100 hectares a day on a wheat farm. If the
       crew maintains this rate, which of the following functions represents
       the number of hectares, h, the crew can harvest in d days?

          A h(d ) = d + 100

          B h(d ) = d – 100

          C h(d ) = 100d

          D h(d ) =


  3.      Mark for Review
                               x               y
                              –3              –7
                              –1              –3
                               2               3


     Based on the chart above, which of the following could express the
     relationship between x and y?

        A y=x–4

        B y = 2x – 1

        C y = 2x + 2

        D y = 3x – 3


4.      Mark for Review
     Line l contains points (3, 2) and (4, 5). If line m is perpendicular to line
     l, which of the following could be the equation of line m?

        A –5x + y =

        B x + 3y = 15

        C x + 5y = 15

        D 3x + y = 5


5.      Mark for Review
     If f (x) = 2x2 + 4 for all real numbers x, which of the following is equal
     to f (3) + 3f (5)?




6.      Mark for Review
     The variable c represents a positive constant in the exponential function
     f (x) =    . What is the value of f (3) if f (4) = 27?




7.      Mark for Review




     The graph of y = g(x) in the xy-plane is shown above. The function g is
     defined by g(x) = ax3 + bx2 – cx, where a, b, and c are constants. For
     how many values of x does g(x) = 0?
       A Zero

       B One

       C Two

       D Three


8.      Mark for Review
     The acceleration of a ball rolling down a ramp can be estimated using
     the function s(t) = 5t, where s represents the speed of the ball and t
     represents time. Given this relationship, which of the following tables
     contains 4 values of t and the corresponding values of s?
9.      Mark for Review
     The graph of line l in the xy-plane passes through the points (2, 5) and
     (4, 11). The graph of line m has a slope of –2 and an x-intercept of 2. If
     point (x, y) is the point of intersection of lines l and m, what is the
     value of y?

        A
         B

         C1

         D2


10.      Mark for Review
      The movement of a roller coaster cart as it completes one ride can be
      modeled by the equation y = –0.05(x – 55.5)2 + 154, which shows the
      cart’s height above the ground y, in feet, x seconds after the ride starts,
      where 0 < x ≤ 111. Which of the following statements best describes
      the meaning of the vertex of the graph of the equation in the xy-plane?

         A The cart reached a maximum height of 154 feet above the
           ground.

         B The cart reached a maximum height of 55.5 feet above the
           ground.

         C The cart’s final height was 154 feet above the ground.

         D The cart’s final height was 55.5 feet above the ground.
CHAPTER DRILL ANSWERS AND
EXPLANATIONS
Functions and Graphs Drill
1.   B

     The question asks for the value of c. Start by plugging in what you
     know into the given function. If f(x) = x2 – c, and f(–2) = 6, then plug in
     –2 for x in the function: f(–2) = (–2)2 – c. Solve and replace f(–2) with
     6: 6 = 4 – c; 2 = –c; and c = –2. If you picked (A), you forgot that (–2)2
     is positive 4. The correct answer is (B).

2.   C

     The question asks for a function that represents a specific situation.
     There are variables in the answer choices, and the question asks about
     the relationship between the number of hectares and the number of

     days, so plug in. Make d = 2. If the crew harvests 100 hectares in 1 day,
     it will harvest twice as many hectares, 200, in 2 days. Now plug d = 2
     and h(d) = 200 into the answer choices and eliminate any that don’t
     work. Choice (A) becomes 200 = 2 + 100, or 200 = 102. This is not
     true, so eliminate (A). Choice (B) becomes 200 = 2 – 100, or 200 = –

     98; eliminate (B). Choice (C) becomes 200 = 100(2), or 200 = 200;
     this is true, so keep (C) but check (D) just in case. Choice (D) becomes
                ; eliminate (D). The correct answer is (C).

3.   B
     The question asks for the equation that best models pairs of values
     given in a table. Plug in the values from the chart. Use the pair (–3, –7)
     from the top of the chart and eliminate answers that are not true. Choice
     (A) becomes –7 = –3 – 4, which is true. Keep it. Keep (B): –7 = 2(–3)
     – 1 is true. Get rid of (C), which becomes –7 = 2(–3) + 2: –7 does not
     equal –4. Get rid of (D): –7 = 3(–3) – 3, and –7 does not equal –12.
     Now use another pair just to test (A) and (B). Using (–1, –3), (A) gives
     –3 = –1 – 4, which is not true, so eliminate it. The correct answer is
     (B).

4.   B

     The question asks for the equation of line m. First, find the slope of line

     l by using the slope formula:                     . A line perpendicular

     to line l must have a slope that is the negative reciprocal of l’s slope.

     So, its slope should be     . In the standard form of a line Ax + By = C,

     the slope is    . Only (B) has a slope of      . If you didn’t remember

     the rule about the slope of perpendicular lines in standard form, you
     could have converted the answers to slope-intercept form and sketched

     out each of the lines to look for the answer that looked perpendicular to
     l. The correct answer is (B).

5.   184

     The question asks for the value of expression that contains two
     functions. In function notation, the number inside the parentheses is the
     x-value that goes into the function, or the input, and the value that comes
     out of the function is the y-value, or the output. When there is a number
     in front of the function, the output value is multiplied by that number.
     Plug x = 3 into the function to get f(3) = 2(3)2 + 4, then f(3) = 2(9) + 4.
     This becomes f(3) = 18 + 4, and then f(3) = 22. Plug x = 5 into the
     function to get f(5) = 2(5)2 + 4, then f(5) = 2(25) + 4, then f(5) = 50 +
     4, and then f(5) = 54. Multiply this output by 3 to get (3)(54) = 162.
     Finally, add the values of f(3) and 3f(5) to get 22 + 162 = 184. The
     correct answer is 184.

6.   9

     The question asks for the value of a function. In function notation, f(x) =

     y. The number inside the parentheses is the x-value that goes into the
     function, or the input, and the value that comes out of the function is the
     y-value, or the output. According to the question, f(4) = 27, so when the
     input is 4, the output is 27. Plug in f(x) = 27 and x = 4, and solve for c.

     The function becomes             . Multiply both sides of the equation by

     3 to get 81 = c4. Take the fourth root of both sides of the equation to get

     c = 3. With the built-in calculator, enter     or use the        button
     under the Functions menu to take the fourth root of 81. The question
     asks for the value of f(3), so plug x = 3 and c = 3 into the function, and

     solve for f(3). The function becomes                 , then               ,

     which becomes f(3) = 9. The correct answer is 9.

7.   D

     The question asks for the number of times the value of a function is 0. In
     function notation, f(x) = y. The number inside the parentheses is the x-
     value that goes into the function, or the input, and the value that comes
     out of the function is the y-value, or the output. When g(x) = 0, the y-
     value on the graph is 0, so this question is asking for the number of x-
     intercepts. Look at the graph to see that it crosses the x-axis 3 times,
     with points at approximately (–1.8, 0), (0, 0), and (0.8, 0). Thus, there
     are 3 times when g(x) = 0. The correct answer is (D).

8.   A

     The question asks for correct values in a function. In function notation,
     the number inside the parentheses is the x-value that goes into the
     function, or the input, and the value that comes out of the function is the
     y-value, or the output. In this scenario, t is the input and s is the output.
     When given a function and asked for the table of values, plug values
     from the answer choices into the function and eliminate answers that
     don’t work. Start with t = 2. Plug t = 2 into the function to get s(2) =
     5(2), or s(2) = 10. Eliminate (C) because it has an incorrect value of s
     when t is 2. Plug t = 3 into the function to get s(3) = 5(3), or s(3) = 15.
     Eliminate (B) because it has an incorrect value of s when t is 3. Next,
     try a value for t that is in (D) but not (A). Plug t = 5 into the function to
     get s(5) = 5(5), or s(5) = 25. Eliminate (D) because it has an incorrect
     value of s when t is 5. The correct answer is (A).

9.   D

     The question asks for the value of y. First, find the slope of line l by

     using the slope formula:                            . Plug this slope and

     one of the points on line l into the slope-intercept form y = mx + b to

     solve for b, giving you the full equation of the line. If you use the point
     (2, 5), you get 5 = 3(2) + b or 5 = 6 + b, so b = −1. Therefore, the
   equation for line l is y = 3x – 1. For line m, the slope is given as −2,
   and the x-intercept is 2. Be very careful not to jump to the conclusion
   that the equation of line m is y = −2x + 2. In the form y = mx + b, the b
   is the y-intercept, not the x-intercept. The x-intercept is where y = 0, so
   you know that (2, 0) is a point on line m. Use this point and the slope to
   find the equation of line m in the same way you did for line l: 0 = −2(2)
   + b, so b = 4 and the equation is y = −2x + 4. Now set the x parts of the
   equations equal to find the point of intersection. If 3x – 1 = −2x + 4,

   then 5x = 5 and x = 1. Again, be careful! The question asked for the
   value of y. Plug x = 1 into one of the line equations to find y. For line l,
   the equation becomes y = 3(1) – 1 = 3 – 1 = 2. The correct answer is
   (D).

10. A

   The question asks about the graph of the data representing a certain
   situation. Start by reading the final question, which asks for the meaning
   of the vertex of the graph. The function is a quadratic in vertex form, y
   = a(x – h)2 + k, in which the vertex is at (h, k). Since a = –0.05, the
   parabola opens downward, and the vertex of the parabola is at (55.5,
   154). Entering the equation into a graphing calculator is a good way to
   visualize all of this information. Next, label parts of the equation given.
   The question states that y is the height above the ground, in feet, and x
   is the number of seconds after the ride starts. The greatest height is at
   the vertex, and the y-value of the vertex is 154, so it is the maximum
   height. The correct answer is (A).
Summary
 Given a function, you put an x-value in and get an f(x) or y-value out.

 Look for ways to use Plugging In and PITA on function questions.

 For questions about the graphs of functions, remember that f(x) = y.

 If the graph contains a labeled point or the question gives you a point,
 plug it into the equations in the answers and eliminate any that aren’t
 true.

 The equation of a line can take two forms. In either form, (x, y) is a point
 on the line.
      In slope-intercept form, y = mx + b, the slope is m and the y-
      intercept is b.
     In standard form, Ax + By = C, the slope is        and the y-intercept

     is   .


 Given two points on a line, (x1, y1) and (x2, y2), the slope is           .


 Two linear equations with infinitely many solutions represent the same
 line.

 Parallel lines have the same slopes and no points of intersection.

 Perpendicular lines have slopes that are negative reciprocals and
 intersect at a right angle.

 To find a point of intersection, plug the point into both equations to see if
 it works, or graph the lines on your calculator when it is allowed.
The roots of a function, also known as solutions, zeroes, or x-intercepts,
are the points where the graph crosses the x-axis and where y = 0.

Graphs of functions can be moved up or down if a number is added to or
subtracted from the function, respectively. They move left if a number is
added inside the parentheses of the function or move right if a number is
subtracted inside the parentheses.

The standard form of a parabola is y = ax2 + bx + c, where c is the y-
intercept. If a is positive, the parabola opens up, and if a is negative, it
opens down.

The factored form of a parabola equation is y = a(x – r1)(x – r2), where
r1 and r2 are the roots or x-intercepts of the parabola.

The vertex form of a parabola equation is y = a(x – h)2 + k, where (h, k)
is the vertex. To get a parabola in the standard form into vertex form,
complete the square.

The standard form of a circle equation is (x – h)2 + (y – k)2 = r2, where
(h, k) is the center and r is the radius. To get a circle equation into the
standard form, complete the square for both the x-terms and the y-terms.

A graphing calculator can make an enormous difference on questions
about graphs. Practice with the calculator you plan to use on test day—
either the built-in calculator or your own—to learn all of the tricks and
feel comfortable with using it during the test.
Chapter 24
Advanced Arithmetic
The Digital SAT includes questions about what the test-writers call Problem
Solving and Data Analysis. Many of these questions test concepts you
learned a few years ago, such as averages and proportions. More difficult
questions will build on these basic concepts by requiring you to use charts
and data or to combine multiple techniques. In this chapter, we will review
the arithmetic and statistical concepts you’ll need to know for the Digital
SAT.
CALL ON THE CALCULATOR
While you work through the topics and examples in this chapter, don’t forget
to use the built-in calculator or your own. Review the earlier section about
the scientific calculator along the way to make sure you’re taking advantage
of this tool. Many of the examples in this chapter will show you how to do
the question by hand because that can help make the concept clearer, but a
calculator will help you do some questions very quickly while avoiding
calculation errors. Even scary-sounding topics like margin of error come
down to the basics of addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division, and
that’s what calculators do best!


RATIOS AND PROPORTIONS
A Ratio Is a Comparison
Many students get extremely nervous when they are asked to work with
ratios. But there’s no need to be nervous. A ratio is a comparison between
the quantities of ingredients you have in a mixture, be it a class full of people
or a bowl of cake batter. Ratios can be written to look like fractions—don’t
get them confused.

The ratio of x to y can be expressed in the following three ways:



          1.


          2. the ratio of x to y

          3. x:y



Part, Part, Whole
Ratios are a lot like fractions. In fact, anything you can do to a fraction
(convert it to a decimal or percentage, reduce it, and so on), you can do to a
ratio. The difference is that a fraction gives you a part (the top number) over
a whole (the bottom number), while a ratio typically gives you two parts
(boys to girls, cars to trucks, sugar to flour), and it is your job to come up
with the whole. For example, if there is one cup of sugar for every two cups
of flour in a recipe, that’s three cups of stuff. The ratio of sugar to flour is
1:2. Add the parts to get the whole.

                  Ratios vs. Fractions
                  Keep in mind that a ratio compares part of
                  something to another part. A fraction compares part
                  of something to the whole thing.
                  Ratio:

                  Fraction:



Ratio to Real
If a class contains 3 students and the ratio of boys to girls in that class is 2:1,
how many boys and how many girls are there in the class? Of course, there
are 2 boys and 1 girl.

Now, suppose a class contains 24 students and the ratio of boys to girls is
still 2:1. How many boys and how many girls are there in the class? This is a
little harder, but the answer is easy to find if you think about it. There are 16
boys and 8 girls.

How did we get the answer? We added up the number of “parts”
in the ratio (2 parts boys plus 1 part girls, or 3 parts all
together) and divided it into the total number of students. In
other words, we divided 24 by 3. This told us that the class
contained 3 equal parts of 8 students each. From the given ratio (2:1), we
knew that two of these parts consisted of boys and one of them consisted of
girls.
The test-writers will often combine ratios with diagrams or data from charts
and graphs. Don’t let them intimidate you with these: just work in bite-sized
pieces and write down the part-to-part relationships that you need to solve
the question.

Try this example.




  1.      Mark for Review
       A lapping slurry contains microbeads suspended in a solution and is
       used to polish a silicon wafer by abrasion of the surface. The
       distribution of the particle size, in micrometers, is shown below.




       Which of the following is closest to the ratio of the number of 11–20
       micrometer microbeads to the number of 31–40 micrometer
       microbeads?

         A 1:9

         B 2:1

         C 3:1

         D 9:1
Here’s How to Crack It
The question asks for a ratio based on data from a graph. To find the ratio of
11–20 micrometer microbeads to 31–40 micrometer microbeads, read
carefully, look up the right information in the graph, and set up the part-to-
part relationship. The 11–20 micrometer microbeads make up 46% of the
total, and the 31–40 micrometer microbeads make up 5% of the total. Plug in
100 for the total to get actual numbers of 46 and 5, respectively. That is a
ratio of 46:5. Because the question is asking for the closest ratio, round the
numbers to get a ratio of 45:5, which reduces to 9:1. Notice that (A) has the
right numbers in the wrong order; always read carefully and use your scratch
paper to avoid this mistake. The correct answer is (D).



Proportions Are Equal Ratios
Some Digital SAT math questions will contain two proportional, or equal,
ratios from which one piece of information is missing.

Here’s an example.

  2.      Mark for Review
       If 2 packages contain a total of 12 doughnuts, how many doughnuts are
       there in 5 packages?

         A 24

         B 30

         C 36

         D 60


Here’s How to Crack It
The question asks for the number of doughnuts in 5 packages. This question
simply describes two equal ratios, one of which is missing a single piece of
information. Here’s the given information represented as two equal ratios:




Because ratios can be written so they look like fractions, you can treat them
exactly like fractions. To find the answer, all you have to do is solve for x.
Start by cross-multiplying:




                                   so, 2x = 60

                                        x = 30

The correct answer is (B).



Proportions: Advanced Principles
Many proportion questions will also involve unit conversion. Be sure to pay
attention to the units and have the same units in both numerators and the same
units in both denominators.

Let’s look at an example.




  3.      Mark for Review
       Gary is using a 3D printer to create a miniature version of himself. The
       scale of the miniature is 0.4 inches to 1 foot of Gary’s actual height. If
     Gary is 5 feet and 9 inches tall, what will be the height of his 3D-
     printed miniature? (12 inches = 1 foot)

        A 2.0 inches

        B 2.3 inches

        C 2.6 inches

        D 2.9 inches


Here’s How to Crack It
The question asks for the height of the 3D miniature. The scale of the 3D
printer is in inches and feet—0.4 inches on the miniature for every 1 foot in
real life. Start by converting every measurement to inches. There are 12
inches in each foot, so the scale will be 0.4 inches = 12 inches in real life.
Now convert Gary’s height into inches. Begin by setting up a proportion to
find out how many inches are in 5 feet.




Cross-multiply to find that 5 feet equals 60 inches. Gary is 5 feet and 9
inches tall, so he is 60 + 9 = 69 inches tall. Now set up a proportion with the
scale of the miniature and Gary’s height in inches.




Cross-multiply to get 12x = 27.6, and then divide both sides by 12 to find that
x = 2.3 inches. The correct answer is (B).



Now try a question that requires converting the units of both parts of a rate.
  4.      Mark for Review
       A car is traveling on the highway at a speed of 65 miles per hour.
       Which of the following is the best approximation of the car’s speed, in
       feet per second? (1 mile = 5,280 feet)

          A 95

          B 190

          C 5,720

          D 343,200


Here’s How to Crack It
The question asks for a rate in different units. Take it one piece at a time to

avoid getting confused. Start by converting miles to feet. The question states

that 1 mile = 5,280 feet, so set up a proportion to determine how many feet
are in 65 miles, being sure to match up units. The proportion is

                      . Cross-multiply to get (5,280)(65) = x, or x = 343,200

feet per hour. This is answer choice (D), but you’re only halfway done with
the conversion. Eliminate trap answer (D).


Next, convert hours to seconds. There are 60 minutes in 1 hour and 60
seconds in 1 minute, so there are (60)(60) = 3,600 seconds in 1 hour. Thus, a

rate of                is the same as a rate of                  . Reduce the
fraction to get a rate of 95.3 feet per second. The question asks for the best
approximation of the car’s speed, and the closest answer is 95. The correct

answer is (A).




PERCENTAGES
Percentages Are Fractions
There should be nothing frightening about a percentage. It’s just a convenient
way of expressing a fraction with a denominator of 100.

Percent means “per 100” or “out of 100.” If there are 100 questions on your
math test and you answer 50 of them, you will have answered 50 out of 100,

or      , or 50 percent. To think of it another way:

                                          = x percent

Memorize These Percentage-Decimal-Fraction
Equivalents
These show up all the time, so go ahead and memorize them.

0.01 =       = 1 percent


0.1 =     = 10 percent


0.2 =    = 20 percent
0.25 =      = 25 percent


0.5 =    = 50 percent


0.75 =      = 75 percent


Converting Percentages to Fractions
To convert a percentage to a fraction, simply put the percentage over 100 and
reduce:

                           80 percent =


Converting Fractions to Percentages
Because a percentage is just another way to express a fraction, you shouldn’t
be surprised to see how easy it is to convert a fraction to a percentage. To do
so, simply use a calculator to divide the top of the fraction by the bottom of
the fraction, and then multiply the result by 100. Here’s an example:

Problem: Express        as a percentage.


Solution:     = 0.75 × 100 = 75 percent.

Converting fractions to percentages is easy with the built-in calculator or
your own. In fact, a calculator is going to be the fastest and most accurate
way to answer most questions about percentages.

Converting Percentages to Decimals
To convert a percentage to a decimal, simply move the decimal point two
places to the left. For example, 25 percent can be expressed as the decimal
0.25; 50 percent is the same as 0.50 or 0.5; 100 percent is the same as 1.00
or 1.

Converting Decimals to Percentages
To convert a decimal to a percentage, just do the opposite of what you did in
the preceding section. All you have to do is move the decimal point two
places to the right. Thus, 0.5 = 50 percent; 0.375 = 37.5 percent; 2 = 200
percent.

The following drill will give you practice working with fractions, decimals,
and percentages.




                 Call on the Calculator
                 Review the first two sections of the Digital SAT
                 Calculator Guide to remember how to work with
                 fractions, decimals, and percentages using the
                 calculator. If you’re planning to use your own
                 calculator, make sure you know how to use it to
                 make these conversions.



FRACTIONS, DECIMALS, AND PERCENTS
DRILL
Fill in the missing information in the following table. Answers can be found
on this page.

                 Fraction                Decimal                Percent
                                             0.2                    20%

         1.
         2.                             3.0
         3.                                               0.5%
         4.


Translation, Please!
Word problems can be translated into arithmetic symbols. Learning how to
translate from English to math will help you immensely on the Digital SAT
Math section. We covered some of this already, but as a review, here are
some of the most common terms you will see in word problems and their
math symbol equivalents:



        Word                                    Symbol
        is, are, costs                          =
        greater than, more than                 +
        fewer than, less than                   –
        of                                      × (multiply)
        percent                                 ÷ 100
        what                                    n (variable)



Do You Speak Math?
Problem: What number is 5 more than 10 percent of 20?

Students often make careless errors on questions like this because they aren’t
sure how to translate the words they are reading into math. You won’t make
mistakes if you take the words slowly, one at a time, and translate each one
into a mathematical symbol. Use the chart above to write this question in

math. What number means “variable,” so you can write that as n (or x or

whatever letter works for you). Is means “equals,” so now you have n = .

Next you are given the number 5, so write that in your equation and you get n

= 5. More than translates to +, and 10 percent is           . That gives you

            . Finally, of 20 means multiply by 20, so now you have the

equation:




You will see the words of, is, product, sum, and what pop up a lot in math
questions on the Digital SAT. Don’t let these words fool you because they all
translate into simple math functions. Memorize all of these terms and their
math equivalents. It will save you time on the test and make your life with the
Digital SAT much less unpleasant.

What Percent of What Percent of What?
On more challenging Digital SAT questions, you may be asked to determine
the effect of a series of percentage increases or decreases. The key point to
remember on such questions is that each successive increase or decrease is
performed on the result of the previous one.

Here’s an example.
   5.      Mark for Review
        A business paid $300 to rent a piece of office equipment for one year.
        The rent was then increased by 10% each year thereafter. How much
        will the company pay for the first three years it rents the equipment?

          A $920

          B $960

          C $990

          D $993




                   Bite-Sized Pieces
                   Always handle percentage problems using Bite-
                   Sized Pieces: one piece at a time.



Here’s How to Crack It
The question asks for the cost of the equipment over three years. This
question is a great place to use Bite-Sized Pieces. You know that the business

paid $300 to rent the piece of office equipment for the first year. Then, you
were told that the rent increases by 10 percent for each year thereafter. That’s
a sure sign that you’re going to need the rent for the second year, so go ahead
and calculate it. For the second year, the rent is                        .

Now, the question tells you that the business rents the equipment for three
years. So, you need to do the calculation one more time. At this point, you
might want to set up a chart to help keep track of the information.

      Year 1: $300

      Year 2:


      Year 3:

To find the answer, all you need to do is add up the costs for each of the three
years.

      Year 1: $300
      Year 2: $330
      Year 3: $363
              $993

The correct answer is (D).



What Percent of What Percent of…Yikes!
Sometimes you may find successive percentage questions in which you aren’t
given actual numbers to work with. In such cases, you need to plug in some
numbers.

Here’s an example.
  6.      Mark for Review
       A number is increased by 25 percent and then decreased by 20 percent.
       The result is what percent of the original number?

         A 80

         B 100

         C 105

         D 120


Here’s How to Crack It
The question asks for the result of a percent increase and a percent decrease
on an original number. You aren’t given a particular number to work with in
this question—just “a number.” Rather than trying to deal with the problem in
the abstract, you should immediately plug in a number to work with. What
number would be easiest to work with in a percentage question? Why, 100,
of course.

 1. 25 percent of 100 is 25, so 100 increased by 25 percent is 125.
 2. Now you have to decrease 125 by 20 percent; 20 percent of 125 is 25,
    so 125 decreased by 20 percent is 100.
 3. 100 (the result) is 100 percent of 100 (the number you plugged in). The
    correct answer is (B).




                  Plugging Away at Relationships
                  Questions dealing with percents, fractions, and
                  other ways of expressing relationships among
                  numbers are great chances to plug in!
Remember, never try to solve a percentage problem by writing an equation if
you can plug in numbers instead. Using Plugging In on percentage questions
is faster, easier, and more accurate. Why work through long, arduous
equations if you don’t have to?




AVERAGES
What Is an Average?
The average, also called the arithmetic mean, of a set of n numbers is
simply the sum of all the numbers divided by n. In other words, if you want

to find the average of three numbers, add them up and divide by 3. For
example, the average of 3, 7, and 8 is             , which equals   , or 6.

That was an easy example, but average questions on the Digital SAT won’t
always have clear solutions. That is, you won’t always be given the
information for averages in a way that is easy to work with. For that reason,
use the formula T = AN, in which T is the total, A is the average, and N is the
number of things. The total is the sum of all the numbers you’re averaging,
and the number of things is the number of elements you’re averaging. Plug in
the information you’ve been given, and then you can solve the equation for
the quantity that you don’t know.

Here’s what the formula looks like using the simple average
example we just gave you.

                                         T = AN

                              3 + 7 + 8 = (A)(3)

                                    18 = (A)(3)
                                          A=6

Here’s another simple example:

Problem: If the mean of three test scores is 70, what is the total of all three
test scores?

Solution: Just put the average (70) and the number of things (3 tests) into the
formula to get T = (70)(3). Then multiply to find the total, which is 210.

                  Total
                  When calculating averages and means, always find
                  the total. It’s the one piece of information that the
                  Digital SAT loves to withhold.



                  Mark It!
                  Make sure you’re using the formula T = AN each
                  time you see the word mean or average in a
                  question.



Averages: Advanced Principles
To solve most difficult average questions, all you have to do is use the
formula more than once. Most of the time you will use it to find the total of
the number being averaged. Here’s an example.




  7.      Mark for Review
       Maria has taken four chemistry tests and has a mean score of 80. If she
       scores a 90 on her fifth chemistry test, what is her mean for these five
       tests?

         A 80
         B 81

         C 82

         D 84


Here’s How to Crack It
The question asks for the mean score Maria received on all 5 tests. Start by
writing out T = AN and filling in what you know. You can put 80 in for the
average and 4 in for the number of things to get T = (80)(4). You can
calculate that Maria has gotten 320 total points on her first four tests.

Now, since the question mentions another average, write the formula again
and fill in the new information. This time, there are five tests, making the
formula T = (A)(5). The question asks for the average, so you also need to
find the total. The total for all five tests is the total from the first four tests
plus the score from the fifth test: 320 + 90 = 410. Put that into the formula to
get 410 = (A)(5) and divide to find the average: 82. The correct answer is
(C).



Averages, and many other arithmetic topics, may be tested using charts and
data. To find the numbers to average, look them up on the graphic provided
and watch out for mismatched units.




   8.    Mark for Review

                      Charge No.               Battery Life
                            1                      1:11
                            2                      1:05
                           3                     0:59
                           4                     0:55
                           5                     0:55
                           6                     0:54
                           7                     0:54

     A toy drone is opened and charged to full battery life. The table above
     shows the duration of the battery life in hours and minutes between
     charges. What is the mean battery life for the first five charges?

        A 55 minutes

        B 58 minutes

        C 1 hour and 1 minute

        D 1 hour and 5 minutes


Here’s How to Crack It
The question asks for the mean battery life for the first 5 charges. To find the
average, add up the battery life values for the first 5 charges and divide by 5.
Make sure that you convert the battery charge time for charges 1 and 2 into

minutes before calculating: 1:11 = 60 + 11 = 71 minutes, and 1:05 = 60 + 5 =

65 minutes. The average is equal to                                    minutes,

which is equal to 1 hour and 1 minute. The correct answer is (C).
                  Call on the Calculator
                  The built-in calculator can give you an average at the
                  click of a button. Read the section on the scientific
                  calculator in the Digital SAT Calculator Guide to
                  review how to find that button in the Functions menu
                  and how to use it to work with averages.


Don’t forget that you can also plug in when answering average questions.




  9.      Mark for Review
       The mean of a list of 5 numbers is n. When an additional number is
       added to the list, the mean of all 6 numbers is n + 3. Which of the
       following is the value, in terms of n, of the number added to the list?

          A 6n + 18

          B 5n

          C n + 18

          D n+6


Here’s How to Crack It
The question asks for the value of a number added to the list. There are
variables in the answers, so plug in for the value of n, which is the average.
If n = 20, then you can use the average formula to find the total of the five
numbers on the list.
                                    T = AN
                                    T = (20)(5)
                                    T = 100

A number is added and there is a new average, so it’s time to write out the
formula again. For this one, you know that there are 6 numbers and that their
average is n + 3 = 20 + 3 = 23.

                                    T = AN
                                    T = (23)(6)
                                    T = 138

Since the difference in the two totals was caused by the addition of the sixth
number, the sixth number must be 138 – 100 = 38. That’s the target, so be
sure to circle it. Now check the answer choices. Choice (A) becomes 6(20)
+ 18 = 120 + 18 = 138. This does not match the target, so eliminate it. The
value with (A) was much too large, so (B) will also be large. Try (C) and
(D) next: (C) becomes 20 + 18 = 38, and (D) becomes 20 + 6 = 26. Only (C)
matches the target, so the correct answer is (C).



On the Digital SAT, you’ll also need to know four other statistical topics:
median, mode, range, and standard deviation. These topics have pretty
straightforward definitions. One way the Digital SAT will complicate the
issue is by presenting the data in a chart or graph, making it harder to see the
numbers you are working with.


WHAT IS A MEDIAN?
The median of a list of numbers is the number that is exactly in the middle of
the list when the list is arranged from smallest to largest, as on a number line.
For example, in the group 3, 6, 6, 6, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 10, 11, the median is 7.
Five numbers come before 7 in the list, and 5 come after. Remember it this
way: median sounds like middle.




                   Missing the Middle?
                   To find the median of a set containing an even
                   number of items, take the average of the two middle
                   numbers.


Let’s see how this idea might be tested.




 10.      Mark for Review

                                 Milligrams of Gold
                                 1          2         3          4        5
         Limestone             0.45       0.58      0.55       0.42      0.41
         Granite               0.94       0.87      0.82       0.55      0.73
         Gneiss                0.38       0.60      0.37       0.40      0.34

       Five samples of each of three different rock types were collected on a
       hiking trip in Colorado. Each sample was analyzed for its gold content.
       The milligrams of gold found in each sample are presented in the table
       above. How much larger is the median of the amount of gold in the
       granite samples than that of the limestone samples?

         A 0.00

         B 0.37
        C 0.45

        D 0.55


Here’s How to Crack It
The question asks for a comparison of the medians of data for limestone and
granite. Start by putting the gold weights for limestone in order to get

                         0.41, 0.42, 0.45, 0.55, 0.58

The median for limestone is the middle number: 0.45 mg.

Next, place the gold weights for granite in order to get

                         0.55, 0.73, 0.82, 0.87, 0.94

The median for granite is 0.82.

Therefore, the difference between the median amount of gold in the granite
and limestone samples is 0.82 – 0.45 = 0.37. The correct answer is (B).




WHAT IS A MODE?
The mode of a group of numbers is the number in the list that appears most
often. In the list 3, 4, 4, 5, 7, 7, 8, 8, 8, 9, 10, the mode is 8, because it
appears three times while no other number in the group appears more than
twice. Remember it this way: mode sounds like “most.”

Because mode by itself is pretty easy to figure out, questions will usually
combine mode with other concepts like mean, median, or range.


WHAT IS A RANGE?
The range of a list of numbers is the difference between the greatest number
in the list and the least number in the list. For the list 4, 5, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10,
20, the greatest number is 20 and the least is 4, so the range is 20 – 4 = 16.




 11.      Mark for Review




       The forecasted monthly sales of a type of sunscreen are presented in the
       figure above. Which of the following best describes the range of
       monthly sales, in millions of dollars, throughout the year shown?

         A 2.5

         B 3.5

         C 4.0

         D 4.5


Here’s How to Crack It
The question asks for the range in monthly sales based on the graph. The
range of a set of values is the difference between the greatest and the smallest
value. The lowest monthly sales number for the sunscreen can be found
where the line dips closest to the bottom of the graph. This happens in both
January and March, when the forecasted sales are 2 million. Make sure to
read the units carefully. The highest point is where the line goes closest to the
top of the graph. This happens in July and August, when the forecasted
monthly sales are 6.5 million. Therefore, the range is 6.5 million – 2 million
= 4.5 million. The correct answer is (D).



The Digital SAT might even have a question that tests more than one of these
statistical concepts at the same time. Take it one step at a time and use POE
when you can.




 12.      Mark for Review

                 Precious Metals in Catalytic Converters, in grams
             1           2         2         3         4             6
             6           6         9         9         10         10
             11         13        14        14         15         17

       The grams of precious metals in recycled catalytic converters were
       measured for a variety of automobiles. The data are presented in the
       table above. If the lowest data point, 1 gram, and highest data point, 17
       grams, are removed from the set, which of the following quantities
       would change the most?

          A Mode

          B Mean

          C Range
         D Median


Here’s How to Crack It
The question asks for the measure of the data that will change the most if two
specific data points are removed. Start by evaluating the easier answer
choices and save mean for last. The mode of the current list is 6, and
removing 1 and 17 from the list won’t change that. Eliminate (A). The range
is the difference between the smallest number and the largest number on the
list. Right now, the range is 17 – 1 = 16. If those extremes are removed from
the list, the new range is 15 – 2 = 13, and the range changed by 3 units. Keep
(C) for now. The median is the middle number in the list, or the average of
the middle two numbers. Currently, both middle numbers are 9, so the median
is 9. This won’t change if 1 and 17 are removed, so eliminate (D). The mean
of a list is not likely to change dramatically with the removal of the numbers
at the extremes, so (C) is likely correct. To actually evaluate the mean, you
need to add up all the numbers on the list and divide by the number of items
in the list. For the current list, the total is 152 for the 18 items, so the average
is 8.44. To find the new total if 1 and 17 are removed, don’t re-add
everything; just subtract 18 from the previous total. The new list will have
only 16 items, so the new average is 8.375. This is only slightly different
than the previous mean, so eliminate (B). The correct answer is (C).




WHAT IS A MARGIN OF ERROR?
Some questions will test margin of error, which is a range of percentages
rather than numbers. A margin of error gives a range for random sampling
errors in a survey or poll. It indicates how much the results might change if
the poll were repeated or if the entire population were asked instead of a
random sample. For example, if a survey shows that 70% of randomly
sampled test-takers prefer the Digital SAT to the paper-and-pencil SAT, and
there is a margin of error of ±5%, that means it is highly likely that between
65% and 75% of all test-takers prefer the Digital SAT.

Let’s look at an example of how this can be tested.




 13.      Mark for Review
       A summer beach volleyball league has 750 players in it. At the start of
       the season, 150 of the players are randomly chosen and polled on
       whether games will be played while it is raining or if the games should
       be canceled. The results of the poll show that 42 of the polled players
       would prefer to play in the rain. The margin of error on the poll is
       ±4%. What is the range of players in the entire league that would be
       expected to prefer to play volleyball in the rain rather than cancel the
       game?

         A 24–32

         B 39–48

         C 150–195

         D 180–240


Here’s How to Crack It
The question asks for the range of players that would prefer to play in the
rain. The first step is to determine the percent of polled players that wanted
to play in the rain.

                                          or 28%
Now apply this percent to the entire population of the league. Since 28% of
the polled players wanted to play in the rain, 28% of all players should want
to play in the rain.




The only range that contains this value is (D), so that is the correct answer.
To actually calculate the margin of error, add and subtract 4% to the actual
percent of 28% to get a range of 24–32% of the total.

                             24% of 750 = 180
                             32% of 750 = 240

Therefore, the entire range is 180 to 240. The correct answer is (D).




WHAT IS A FREQUENCY TABLE?
Another way the Digital SAT tests statistical concepts is by using a
frequency table. This is just what it sounds like: a table to show how
frequently something happens. One column shows the numbers of something,
like ages or scores on a test, and the other column shows how often that thing
occurs. If you wanted to show, for example, how many meetings each
member of a 15-person club attended, you could use the table below.

                Meeting Attendance for this Cool Club I’m In

                     Meetings attended          Frequency
                             1                       2
                             2                       1
                             3                       1
                              4                      3
                              5                      5
                              6                      3

Frequency tables give you ways to find the mean, median, and mode of a list
of numbers without needing to write out the whole list, so the test-writers
will often combine those concepts with frequency tables in the same
question.

Try out an example of this below.




 14.      Mark for Review

    Number of Ice Cream Scoops for Customers at an Ice Cream Parlor

                Number of Ice Cream Scoops               Frequency
                              8                             1
                              5                             2
                              4                             2
                              3                             7
                              2                             6
                              1                             6

       The distribution of ice cream scoops for 24 customers at an ice cream
       parlor is displayed in the table above. Which of the following orders
       the median, mode, and range correctly?

         A mode < median < range
        B median < mode < range

        C median < range < mode

        D range < median < mode


Here’s How to Crack It
The question asks for the correct order of the median, mode, and range of the
data from least to greatest. Start with the mode, which is easy to determine
from the table. Since the greatest number in the Frequency column is 7, the
corresponding number of scoops is the mode. Thus, the mode is 3.

The range is also easy to determine from the table because the range of a list
of numbers is the difference between the greatest number and the least
number. The greatest number of ice cream scoops is 8 and the least number of
ice cream scoops is 1, so the range is 8 – 1 = 7. The mode of 3 is less than
the range of 7. Eliminate (C) and (D) because they have the range as less than
the mode.

Next, find the median, which is the middle number of an ordered list. You
could write out all 24 numbers in this list and count up to the middle

number(s), but there’s a better way. When a list has an even number of terms,

the median is the average of the two middle terms. Since           , the median

is the average of the 12th and 13th terms. To confirm this, notice that there
are 12 – 1 = 11 terms to the left of the 12th term and 24 – 13 = 11 terms to the
right of the 13th term. Now, use the frequency table to find the 12th and 13th
terms. The table shows that 6 customers chose 1 scoop, and 6 customers
chose 2 scoops, so the 12th term is 2. The next 7 customers chose 3 scoops,

so the 13th term is 3. The average of 2 and 3 is            . Thus, the median

is 2.5. This is less than 3, so the median is less than the mode. Eliminate (A)
because it has the mode as less than the median. The correct answer is (B).




WHAT IS STANDARD DEVIATION?
In real-world applications, standard deviation is a measure of how numbers
are distributed around the mean, and the calculations can get complicated.
But Digital SAT math is not the real world! Think of standard deviation as
similar to range in that it shows the spread of a group of numbers. When the
numbers are more spread out around the mean, the standard deviation is
greater. When the numbers are clumped closer together around the mean, the
standard deviation is smaller.

Take a look at the example on the next page of how a Digital SAT question
might combine standard deviation with another statistical concept you
already know.




 15.     Mark for Review

                      Data Set 1              Data Set 2
                           6                       4
                           4                       3
                           3                       7
                           8                       8
                           4                        2
                           6                        5
                           5                        6

      The table above shows two sets of data. Of the following statements
      comparing Data Set 1 to Data Set 2, which is true?

         A The standard deviations are the same, and the medians are
           the same.

         B The standard deviations are the same, and the medians are
           different.

         C The standard deviations are different, and the medians are
           the same.

         D The standard deviations are different, and the medians are
           different.


Here’s How to Crack It
The question asks which statement is true about the medians and standard
deviations of two data sets. Start by finding the median of each data set,
recalling that the median of a group of numbers is the middle number when
all values are arranged in order. Start by putting the lists in order. Data Set 1
is 3, 4, 4, 5, 6, 6, 8, and Data Set 2 is 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. Both Data Set 1 and
Data Set 2 have 7 numbers, so the median will be the fourth number. The
median of Data Set 1 is 5, and the median of Data Set 2 is 5. The medians are
the same, so eliminate (B) and (D).

Standard deviation is a measure of the spread of a group of numbers. In Data
Set 1, the numbers are clustered toward the middle. In Data Set 2, each
number appears once and the numbers are evenly spread throughout the list.
Thus, Data Set 1 has a smaller standard deviation than does Data Set 2.
Eliminate (A), which says the standard deviations are the same. The correct
answer is (C).




PROBABILITY
Probability is a mathematical expression of the likelihood of an event. The
basis of probability is simple. The likelihood of any event is discussed in
terms of all of the possible outcomes. To express the probability of a given
event, x, you would count the number of possible outcomes, count the number
of outcomes that give you what you want, and arrange them in a fraction, like
this:


                                 Probability of




Every probability is a fraction. The largest a probability can be is 1; a

probability of 1 indicates total certainty. The smallest a probability can be is
0, meaning that it’s something that cannot happen. Furthermore, you can find
the probability that something WILL NOT happen by subtracting the
probability that it WILL happen from 1. For example, if the meteorologist
tells you that there is a 0.3 probability of rain today, then there must be a 0.7
probability that it won’t rain, because 1 – 0.3 = 0.7. Figuring out the

probability of any single event is usually simple. When you flip a coin, for
example, there are only two possible outcomes, heads and tails; the
probability of getting heads is therefore 1 out of 2, or . When you roll a die,

there are six possible outcomes, 1 through 6; the odds of getting a 4 are

therefore    . The odds of getting an even result when rolling a die are

because there are 3 even results in 6 possible outcomes.

Here’s an example of a probability question.




 16.      Mark for Review
       A bag contains 7 blue marbles and 14 marbles that are not blue. If one
       marble is drawn at random from the bag, what is the probability that the
       marble is blue?

         A

         B

         C

         D


Here’s How to Crack It
The question asks for the probability that a selected marble is blue. To make
the probability, find the number of blue marbles and the total number of
marbles. Here, there are 21 marbles in the bag, 7 of which are blue. The
probability that a marble chosen at random would be blue is therefore       , or

 . The correct answer is (A).




Let’s look at a probability question based on a chart. Again, getting to the
correct answer involves reading the chart carefully to find the right numbers
to use.




 17.      Mark for Review
       The table below shows the distribution of 300 high school students
       signing up for elective classes.

                        Culinary      World    Computer
                                                               Total
                         Arts       Literature Coding
         Freshmen          18           22          38           78
         Sophomores        24           21          15           60
         Juniors           30           9           18           57
         Seniors           37           38          30          105
         Total             109          90          101         300

       If one of the students is randomly selected, what is the probability of
       selecting a student who is a junior taking culinary arts? (Express your
       answer as a decimal or fraction, not as a percent.)
                 See Chapter 26 for more about fill-in questions.



Here’s How to Crack It
The question asks for a probability based on data in a table. Probability is

defined as                                                          . Read the table

carefully to find the numbers to make the probability. There are 300 total
students, so that is the total # of possible outcomes. Of these 300 students,
30 are juniors taking culinary arts, so that is the # of outcomes that give you
what you want. Therefore, the probability that a student chosen at random is

a junior taking culinary arts is        . This answer cannot be entered into the

fill-in box, which only accepts 5 characters when the answer is positive. All

equivalent answers that fit will be accepted, so reduce the fraction or convert

it to a decimal. The correct answer is            ,     , 0.1, or another equivalent

form.




RATES
Rate is a concept related to averages. Cars travel at an average speed. Work
gets done at an average rate. Because the ideas are similar, the formulas you
can use for rate problems are similar to the one for averages you learned
about earlier. These formulas are D = RT for distance and W = RT for work.

Here’s a simple example:
Problem: If a fisherman can tie 9 flies for fly fishing in an hour and a half,
how long does it take him to tie one fly, in minutes?

Solution: First, convert the hour and a half to 90 minutes so your units are
consistent. Then, fill in the formula with the work or amount done (9 flies)
and the time (90 minutes).

                                    W = RT

                                    9 = (R)(90)

Divide 9 by 90 to get R =    , so the rate is one fly every 10 minutes.

You have already seen that rate questions often involve proportions or unit
conversion. As always, write down everything and label it carefully to avoid
performing the wrong arithmetic operations.


IS THERE SCIENCE ON THE DIGITAL SAT?
No, there isn’t, but the test-writers like to make it look like there is. Some
questions will use scientific topics and other “real-world” contexts to make
things look more complicated. Don’t worry about memorizing data about
rock types or knowing what a lapping slurry is; just focus on the math.

Take a look at this next example.




 18.     Mark for Review
     A study about changes in blood type phenotypes after bone marrow
     transplants recorded the blood types of 300 people before they
     underwent a bone marrow transplant. How many more people in the
     study had blood type B– than blood type A+?




Here’s How to Crack It
The question asks for the difference between two values based on a graph.
Read the graph carefully and look up the necessary values. Find the bar on
the graph for blood type B–, then look at the vertical axis to find the number
of people with that blood type. The bar goes up to the line at 30, so 30
people have blood type B–. Do the same thing for A+ to see that 10 people
have blood type A+. Translate how many more as subtraction to get 30 – 10
= 20. The correct answer is 20.



You may also be asked to graph the data presented in a table. Your
knowledge of positive and negative relationships will help—you can
eliminate things with the wrong relationship.
19.      Mark for Review

           Temperature in °C (t)         Vapor Pressure in kPa (p)
                     10                              4
                     20                              9
                     30                             37
                     40                             66
                     50                             100

      A student conducting experiments in class noticed that the temperature
      of a given liquid affected the vapor pressure of the liquid, as shown in
      the table above. Which of the following graphs best represents the
      relationship between the temperature, t, and the vapor pressure, p, as
      indicated by the table?
Here’s How to Crack It
The question asks for the graph that shows the relationship between
temperature and vapor pressure. Notice that the vapor pressure increases as
the temperature increases. The line or curve of best fit will go up as you
follow the graph from left to right, so eliminate (B) and (D). To determine if
the correct graph is (A) or (C), try roughly plotting the data points, and then
look at your graph. Notice that the vapor pressure does not increase by the
same number for each 10-degree temperature increase. This is an exponential
increase, not a linear increase. Therefore, the graph will be curved.
Eliminate (C). The correct answer is (A).
Advanced Arithmetic Drill
Work these questions using the advanced arithmetic techniques covered in
this chapter. Answers and explanations can be found starting on this page.

  1.      Mark for Review
       The volume of a water tank decreased by a total of 144 liters over the
       course of 9 days. What was the rate, in liters per day, at which the
       volume decreased?

         A 16

         B 135

         C 153

         D 1,296



  2.      Mark for Review

                       Number                Frequency
                           1                      3
                           2                      1
                           3                      2
                           4                      4

       Which of the following lists of data is represented by the frequency
       table shown above?

         A 1, 1, 2, 2, 2, 3, 4, 4, 4, 4
       B 1, 1, 1, 2, 3, 3, 4, 4, 4, 4

       C 1, 2, 2, 3, 3, 3, 4, 4, 4, 4

       D 2, 3, 6, 16


3.      Mark for Review
     Steve ran a 12-mile race at an average speed of 8 miles per hour. If
     Adam ran the same race at an average speed of 6 miles per hour, how
     many minutes longer did Adam take to complete the race than did
     Steve?

       A 12

       B 16

       C 24

       D 30


4.      Mark for Review
     The amount of time that Amy walks is directly proportional to the
     distance that she walks. If she walks a distance of 2.5 miles in 50
     minutes, how many miles will she walk in 2 hours?

       A 4.5

       B5

       C6

       D 6.5
5.      Mark for Review
     A total of 140,000 votes was cast for two candidates, Candidate A and
     Candidate B. If Candidate A won by a ratio of 4 to 3, how many votes
     were cast for Candidate B?

       A 30,000

       B 40,000

       C 60,000

       D 80,000


6.      Mark for Review
     A random sample of students at a local school was surveyed to
     determine the proportion of students with brown hair. Out of the 200
     students sampled, 70 had brown hair. The margin of error of the survey
     was 6%. Which of the following is the most reasonable conclusion
     about the percentage of students with brown hair?

       A No less than 29% of the students have brown hair.

       B Between 29% and 41% of the students have brown hair.

       C Exactly 35% of the students have brown hair.

       D No more than 41% of the students have brown hair.


7.      Mark for Review

                         29, 32, 31, 29, 24, 25, 26

     The data set shown above contains 7 integer values. If an 8th integer
     between 20 and 50 is added to the data set, the new mean will be 2
     more than the current mean. What is the value of the 8th integer added
     to the data set?




8.      Mark for Review
     Of all the houses in a certain neighborhood, 80% have garages. Of
     those houses with garages, 60% have two-car garages. If there are 56
     houses with garages that are not two-car garages, how many houses are
     there in the neighborhood?

       A 93

       B 117

       C 156

       D 175


9.      Mark for Review




     Data set R is represented by the dot plot above. Data set Q is created
     by subtracting 35 from each of the values in data set R. Which of the
     following statements correctly compares the standard deviations of
     data sets R and Q?
        A There is not enough information to compare these standard
          deviations.

        B The standard deviation of data set R is greater than the
          standard deviation of data set Q.

        C The standard deviation of data set R is less than the
          standard deviation of data set Q.

        D The standard deviation of data set R is equal to the standard
          deviation of data set Q.


10.     Mark for Review
      On Tuesday, a watchmaker made 4 more watches than he made on
      Monday. If he made 16% more watches on Tuesday than on Monday,
      how many watches did he make on Tuesday?

        A 20

        B 21

        C 25

        D 29
CHAPTER DRILL ANSWERS AND
EXPLANATIONS
Fractions, Decimals, and Percents Drill

1.       , 0.5, 50%


2.       , 3.0, 300%


3.           , 0.005, 0.5%


4.       ,        ,    %


Advanced Arithmetic Drill
1.   A

     The question asks for a rate. Begin by reading the question to find
     information about the rate. The question states that the volume
     decreased by a total of 144 liters over the course of 9 days and asks
     for the rate of decrease in liters per day. Divide the number of liters by

     the number of days to get                     . The rate is 16 liters per

     day. The correct answer is (A).

2.   B
     The question asks for the list of numbers that correctly represents a
     frequency table. A frequency table has two columns: the left-hand
     column contains the values, and the right-hand column contains the
     number of times each value occurs, or its frequency. Work in bite-sized
     pieces and eliminate answer choices that do not match the data.
     According to the table, the number 1 has a frequency of 3, so the
     number 1 should be in the list 3 times. Eliminate (A), (C), and (D)
     because they do not have the number 1 in the list 3 times. Choice (B)
     shows the correct frequency for each value. The correct answer is (B).

3.   D

     The question asks for the difference in minutes between Steve’s time

     and Adam’s time. Use the formula D = RT to calculate the time for each
     runner. Steve runs 12 miles at 8 miles per hour, so the formula becomes
     12 = (8)(T). To find Steve’s time, divide his distance by his rate, which

     means that he runs for    hours (or 1.5 if you’re using your calculator).

     Adam runs the same 12 miles at 6 miles per hour, so the formula
     becomes 12 = (6)(T). This means that Adam runs for 2 hours. Adam
     takes one-half hour longer to complete the race, and one-half hour is 30

     minutes. The correct answer is (D).

4.   C

     The question asks for the distance Amy can walk in two hours if she

     walks at a given rate. Since you know the time that Amy walked and the
     distance she walked are directly proportional, you can set up a
     proportion to show her distance ÷ time. The time it took her to walk 2.5
     miles is given in minutes and the requested time is in hours, so match
     the units in the proportion by putting 120(60 × 2) minutes in the second

     half of the ratio:              . To solve, cross-multiply, and you’ll get

     50x = 2.5 × 120; 50x = 300; x = 6 miles. The correct answer is (C).

5.   C

     The question asks for the number of votes Candidate B received. You
     know the ratio for the votes is 4 for Candidate A to every 3 for
     Candidate B, so the proportion of votes Candidate B received is 3 out

     of every 7 or        of the total votes. There were 140,000 votes all

     together, so Candidate B received (140,000) = 60,000 votes. The

     correct answer is (C).

6.   B

     The question asks for a reasonable conclusion based on survey results
     and a margin of error. Work in bite-sized pieces and eliminate after
     each piece. Start by determining the percent of surveyed students with
     brown hair by dividing the number of students with brown hair by the

     total number of students and multiplying by 100:                        .A

     margin of error expresses the amount of random sampling error in a
     survey’s results. Eliminate (C) because it is only the result, 35%, not a

     range above and below the result. The margin of error is 6%, meaning
     that results within a range of 6% above and 6% below the estimate are
     reasonable. The study found that 35% of students have brown hair, so
     the reasonable results for this study are between 29% and 41%.
     Eliminate (A) because it only addresses the lower limit. Keep (B)
     because it addresses both the lower limit and the upper limit. Eliminate

     (D) because it only addresses the upper limit. The correct answer is
     (B).

7.   44

     The question asks for a value given information about the mean of a
     data set. For averages, use the formula T = AN, in which T is the Total,
     A is the Average, and N is the Number of things. Start by finding the
     average of the seven integers given in the question. There are 7 values,
     so N = 7. Find the Total by adding the seven integers to get T = 29 + 32
     + 31 + 29 + 24 + 25 + 26 = 196. The average formula becomes 196 =
     (A)(7). Divide both sides of the equation by 7 to get A = 28. The
     question states that, after an eighth integer is added to the data set, the
     new average will be 2 more than the current average. Since the
     current average is 28, the new average will be 28 + 2 = 30. There are
     now 8 integers in the data set, so plug N = 8 and A = 30 into the data set
     to get T = (30)(8) = 240. The question asks for the value of the eighth
     integer, so subtract the Total of the 7 integers from the Total of the 8
     integers to get 240 – 196 = 44 as the value of the eighth integer. The
     correct answer is 44.

8.   D
     The question asks for the number of houses in the neighborhood. Start
     by figuring out what percent of the houses do not have two-car garages.
     Since 60% of the houses with garages have two-car garages, 40% of

     the houses with garages do not have two-car garages. In other words,
     40% of 80% of the houses do not have two-car garages. Translate that
     into math to get                 of the houses. The question states that

     56 houses do not have two-car garages, which means 32% of the
     houses equals 56. Translating into math gives               Solve for x,

     and you’ll get 175. Another great option for questions that ask for

     something specific like number of houses is plugging in the answers.
     Either way, the correct answer is (D).

9.   D

     The question asks for a comparison of the standard deviations of two
     data sets. Standard deviation is a measure of the spread of a group of
     numbers. A group of numbers close together has a small standard
     deviation, whereas a group of numbers spread out has a large standard
     deviation. Subtracting 35 from each number will change the values in
     the data set but will not change how they are distributed. The dot plot
     of data set Q will look the same as the dot plot of data set R except for
     the values along the bottom of the dot plot. Because the shape of the dot
     plot remains the same, so does the standard deviation, and the two data
     sets have the same standard deviation. The correct answer is (D).

10. D
The question asks for the number of watches a watchmaker made on
Tuesday. This is a specific amount, and there are numbers in the answer
choices, so plug in the answers. Start with (B). If the watchmaker made
21 watches on Tuesday, then he must have made 17 watches on
Monday. You know that he should have made 16% more watches on
Tuesday than on Monday, so use the percent change formula

                     to see if you get 16%:    × 100 = 23.5%, which is

too big. Eliminate (B). You want the 4 watches to be a smaller percent
of the total, so you need a bigger total. Try a bigger answer choice, like
(D). If he made 29 watches on Tuesday, then he made 25 watches on

Monday. Now the percent change is                      which is exactly

what you want. The correct answer is (D).
Summary
 A ratio can be expressed as a fraction, but ratios are not fractions. A
 ratio compares parts to parts; a fraction compares a part to the whole.

 Set up proportions in the form           .


 A percentage is just a convenient way of expressing a fraction with a
 denominator of 100.

 To convert a percentage to a fraction, put the percentage over 100 and
 reduce.

 To convert a fraction to a percentage, use your calculator to divide the
 top of the fraction by the bottom of the fraction. Then multiply the result
 by 100.

 To convert a percentage to a decimal, move the decimal point two
 places to the left. To convert a decimal to a percentage, move the
 decimal point two places to the right.

 In questions that require you to find a series of percentage increases or
 decreases, remember that each successive increase or decrease is
 performed on the result of the previous one.

 If you need to find the percent increase or decrease, use % change =
                 .

 To find the mean, or average, of several values, add up the values and
 divide the total by the number of values.

 Use the formula T = AN to solve questions involving means, or averages.
 The key to most average questions is finding the total.
The median of a group of numbers is the number that is exactly in the
middle of the group when the group is arranged from smallest to largest,
as on a number line. If there is an even number of numbers, the median is
the average of the two middle numbers.

The mode of a group of numbers is the number in the group that appears
most often.

The range of a group of numbers is the difference between the greatest
number in the group and the least number.

Standard deviation is a measure of the spread, or distribution, of a group
of numbers. More spread out means a large standard deviation, and more
clustered together means a small standard deviation.

Margin of error is the range above and below the value predicted by a
survey within which the actual value is likely to be.

Probability is expressed as a fraction:

    Probability =

On questions about rates, use the formulas D = RT and W = RT. Be
careful with the units—the Digital SAT will often require you to do a
unit conversion such as minutes to hours or inches to feet.
Chapter 25
Geometry and Trigonometry
The final math topics that are tested regularly on the Digital SAT are
geometry and trigonometry. There will be 6 or 7 questions total on these
topics, split between the two modules. These questions cover topics such as
lines and angles, triangles, circles, and trig functions. This chapter covers
each of those topics and more, and provides a step-by-step walkthrough for
each type of question.
GEOMETRY ON THE DIGITAL SAT
Several geometry questions will test your knowledge of basic geometry
rules, including formulas. Never fear! There is a reference sheet in the testing
app that you can open at any time by clicking on the word Reference in the
upper right corner of the screen. It saves time to know these facts and
formulas ahead of time, but use the reference sheet to check or to look things
up that you don’t already know.




This reference sheet contains some of what you’ll need to tackle geometry on
the Digital SAT. In this chapter, we’ll cover a basic approach for geometry
questions and other information you’ll need to know to handle geometry and
trig questions on the Digital SAT.

Geometry: Basic Approach
For the handful of geometry questions that appear on the Digital SAT, we
recommend the following step-by-step approach:
              1. Draw a figure on your scratch paper. If the question
                 contains the note “Figure not drawn to scale,” draw the
                 figure using information in the question.
              2. Label the figure with any information given in the
                 question. Sometimes you can plug in for parts of the
                 figure as well.
              3. Write down formulas that you might need for the
                 question.
              4. Ballpark if you’re stuck or running short on time.


These four steps, combined with the techniques you’ve learned in the rest of
this book and the geometry concepts this chapter will cover, will enable you
to tackle any geometry question you might run across on the Digital SAT.

Before we dive in to the nitty-gritty, let’s try a question using this approach.




   1.      Mark for Review
        In triangle ABC, angle B = 60° and AC is perpendicular to BC. If AB =
        x, what is the area of triangle ABC, in terms of x?

          A


          B


          C

          D
Here’s How to Crack It
The question asks for the area of the triangle. Follow the steps outlined on
the previous page. Start by drawing the figure. If AC is perpendicular to BC,
then triangle ABC is a right triangle with the right angle at point C:




The next step is to label what you know. Angle B = 60° can go right into the
figure. Because AB = x, you can plug in for x; make x = 4. Label this
information in the figure:




Next, figure out what other information you know. Because there are 180° in
a triangle, angle A = 180 – 90 – 60 = 30°. This is a 30°-60°-90° special right
triangle, which you are given information about in the reference sheet. Based

on the figure given in the box, the hypotenuse is equal to 2x. (Note that this is
a different x from the one you plugged in for; the test-writers are trying to

confuse you.) So, if the hypotenuse is 4,            ; this is the side opposite

the 30° angle, BC. The remaining side, AC, is        , which is      . Label this
information in your figure:




Now write down the formula you need. The question is asking for the area,

so use the area of a triangle formula from the reference sheet:           . Fill

in what you know. Because this is a right triangle, you can use the two legs of

the triangle as the base and the height. Make b =           and h = 2 in the

equation and solve:                           . This is your target; circle it.

Now plug in x = 4 (that’s the x from the question, NOT the x from the
information in the reference sheet!) into each answer choice and eliminate

what doesn’t equal      . Only (A) works, so the correct answer is (A).



Now that we’ve covered how to approach geometry questions, let’s look
more closely at some of the geometry concepts you’ll need for these
questions.


LINES AND ANGLES
Here are the basic rules you need to know for questions about lines and
angles on the Digital SAT.
1. A circle contains 360 degrees.
  Every circle contains 360 degrees. Each degree is             of the total

  distance around the outside of the circle. It doesn’t matter whether the

  circle is large or small; it still has exactly 360 degrees.

2. When you think about angles, remember circles.
   An angle is formed when two line segments extend from a common
   point. If you think of the point as the center of a circle, the measure of
   the angle is the number of degrees enclosed by the lines when they pass
   through the edge of the circle. Once again, the size of the circle doesn’t
   matter; neither does the length of the lines. Refer to the following
   figure.




3. A line is a 180° angle.
   You probably don’t think of a line as an angle, but it is one. Think of it
   as a flat angle. The following drawings should help:
4. When two lines intersect, four angles are formed.
   The following figure should make this clear. The four angles are
   indicated by letters.




5. When two lines intersect, the angles opposite each other will have
   the same measures.
   Such angles are called vertical angles. In the following figure, angles a
   and c are equal; so are angles b and d.




                         a + b + c + d = 360°
                             a = c, b = d
The measures of these four angles add up to 360°. (Remember the circle.)




                           a + b + c + d = 360°

It doesn’t matter how many lines you intersect through a single point. The
total measure of all the angles formed will still be 360°.




                   a + b + c + d + e + f + g + h = 360°
                         a = e, b = f , c = g, d = h
   6. If two lines are perpendicular to each other, each of the four angles
      formed is 90°.
      A 90° angle is called a right angle.

                  Perpendicular:
                  Meeting at right (90°) angles




                         Angles a, b, c, and d all equal 90°.

The little box at the intersection of the two lines is the symbol for a right
angle. If the lines are not perpendicular to each other, then none of the angles
will be right angles. Don’t assume that an angle is a right angle unless you
are specifically told that it is a right angle, either in the question or with the
right angle symbol.

                  Flip and Negate
                  If two lines are perpendicular, then their slopes are
                  negative reciprocals; i.e., if l1 has a slope of 2 and l2

                  is perpendicular to l1 , then l2 must have a slope of

                     .
7. When two parallel lines are cut by a third line, all of the small
   angles are equal, all of the big angles are equal, and the sum of any
   big angle and any small angle is 180°.
   Parallel lines are two lines that never intersect, and the rules
   about parallel lines are usually taught in school with lots of big
   words. But we like to avoid big words whenever possible.
   Simply put, when a line cuts through two parallel lines, two
   kinds of angles are created: big angles and small angles. You can
   tell which angles are big and which are small just by looking at
   them. All the big angles look equal, and they are. The same is
   true of the small angles. Lastly, any big angle plus any small
   angle always equals 180°. (The test-writers like rules about
   angles that add up to 180° or 360°.)

             Parallel Lines
             Parallel lines have the same slope.


  In any geometry question, never assume that two lines are parallel
  unless the question or figure specifically tells you so. The two lines in
  the following figure are parallel. Angle a is a big angle, and it has the
  same measure as angles c, e, and g, which are also big angles. Angle b
  is a small angle, and it has the same measure as angles d, f, and h,
  which are also small angles.
                               l2 is parallel to l3
                                  a=c=e=g
                                  b=d=f=h

       You should be able to see that the degree measures of angles a, b, c,
       and d add up to 360°. So do those of angles e, f, g, and h. If you have
       trouble seeing it, draw a circle around the angles. What is the degree
       measure of a circle? Also, the sum of any small angle (such as d) and
       any big angle (such as g) is 180°.

Let’s see how these concepts might be tested on the Digital SAT.




  2.      Mark for Review
                       Note: Figure not drawn to scale.

     In the figure above, l2 is parallel to l3. If b = 130, what is the value of
     e?

         A 40

         B 50

         C 90

         D 130


Here’s How to Crack It
The question asks for the value of an angle on a figure. Use the Geometry
Basic Approach. Start by redrawing the figure on your scratch paper. This
figure has a lot going on, so only draw the parts you need and add more later
if necessary. Angle e is between lines 3 and 4, and line 2 is parallel to line 3.
That all seems important, so include it in your figure.

The drawing should look something like this:
Next, label the figure with information given in the question, and label angle
b as 130°. When a geometry question states that two lines are parallel, it’s
almost certainly testing the rules about angles. Recall that when two parallel
lines are cut by a third line, two kinds of angles are created: big and small.
All of the small angles are equal to each other, all of the big angles are equal
to each other, and any small angle + any big angle = 180°. Angle b is a big
angle and angle e is a small angle, so b + e = 180. Plug in the measure of
angle b to get 130 + e = 180. Subtract 130 from both sides of the equation to
get e = 50. The correct answer is (B).




TRIANGLES
Here are some basic triangle rules you’ll need to know for the Digital SAT.

   1. Every triangle contains 180°.
      The word triangle means “three angles,” and every triangle contains
      three interior angles. The measure of these three angles always adds up
      to exactly 180°. You don’t need to know why this is true or how to
      prove it. You just need to know it. And we mean know it.
2. An isosceles triangle is one in which two of the sides are equal in
   length.
   The angles opposite those equal sides are also equal because angles
   opposite equal sides are also equal.




                         AB = AC AB ≠ BC
                            c=b c≠a

3. An equilateral triangle is one in which all three sides are equal in
   length.
   Because the angles opposite equal sides are also equal, all three angles
   in an equilateral triangle are equal too. (Their measures are always 60°
   each.)
              Equilateral Triangles
              An equilateral triangle is also isosceles.




                                AB = BC = AC

4. A right triangle is a triangle in which one of the angles is a right
   angle (90°).
   The longest side of a right triangle, which is always opposite the 90°
   angle, is called the hypotenuse. The other two sides are called legs.




                            AC is the hypotenuse.

  Some right triangles are also isosceles. The angles in an isosceles right
  triangle always measure 45°, 45°, and 90°.
                              AB = BC

5. The perimeter of a triangle is the sum of the lengths of its sides.




                      perimeter = 4 + 6 + 6 = 16

6. The area of a triangle is (base × height).
                 In or Out
                 The height can be found with a line dropped inside or
                 outside the triangle—just as long as it’s
                 perpendicular to the base.


Pythagorean Theorem
The Pythagorean Theorem states that in a right triangle, the square of the
hypotenuse equals the sum of the squares of the other two sides. As
mentioned earlier, the hypotenuse is the longest side of a right triangle; it’s
the side opposite the right angle. The square of the hypotenuse is its length
squared. Applying the Pythagorean Theorem to the following drawing, we
find that a2 + b2 = c2.




If you forget the Pythagorean Theorem, you can always look it up on the
reference sheet.

                 Pythagorean Theorem
                 a2 + b2 = c 2 , where c is the hypotenuse of a right
                 triangle. Learn it; love it.




  3.     Mark for Review
     In triangle ABC, angle B is a right angle, AB = 4, and           . If the

     perimeter of the triangle can be written in the form          , and a is a
     constant, what is the value of a?




Here’s How to Crack It
The question asks for the value of a constant given information about a
triangle. Use the Geometry Basic Approach. Start by drawing a right triangle

on your scratch paper and put the right angle symbol at B. Next, label the
figure with information from the question. Label side AB as 4 and side AC as
    . Notice that side AC is opposite the right angle, so it is the hypotenuse.

The drawing should look something like this:




To find the length of the third side, use the Pythagorean Theorem: a2 + b2 =

c2. Plug in the known values to get                  . Square the numbers to
get 16 + b2 = 32, then subtract 16 from both sides of the equation to get b2 =

16. Take the square root of both sides of the equation to get b = 4. Label side
BC as 4. This happens to be an isosceles right triangle, which is one of the

triangles on the reference sheet. If you catch that, you might be able to find
the length of the third side faster, but using the Pythagorean Theorem works
well, too.


The perimeter of a geometric shape is the sum of the lengths of the sides, so
               , or             . Set this equal to the different form of the
perimeter given in the question to get                      . Distribute on the

right side of the equation to get                   . Subtract      from both
sides of the equation to get 8 = 4a. Divide both sides of the equation by 4 to

get 2 = a. The correct answer is 2.



SOHCAHTOA
Trigonometry will appear on the Digital SAT Math section. But fear not!
Many trigonometry questions you will see mostly require you to know the
basic definitions of the three main trigonometric functions. SOHCAHTOA
is a way to remember the three functions.
Check out this next example.




  4.      Mark for Review




       In the triangle above, sin x = 0.8 and cos x = 0.6. What is the area of
       the triangle?

          A 0.48

          B 4.8

          C 24

          D 48


Here’s How to Crack It
The question asks for the area of the triangle. Use the definitions of sine and

cosine to find the two legs of the triangle. Sine is              , so if sin x =

0.8, then                 . Multiply both sides by 10 and you find the side

opposite the angle with measure x° is 8. Similarly, cosine is                , so

if cos x = 0.6, then                . Multiply both sides by 10 to determine that

the side adjacent to the angle with measure x° is 6. With those two sides, find
the area. The formula for area is            , so                  . The correct

answer is (C).



The test-writers love to ask you questions involving the Pythagorean
Theorem along with SOHCAHTOA. See the following question.




   5.      Mark for Review

        In triangle ABC, AC is perpendicular to BC and cos(B) =     . What is

        the value of tan(B)?

          A

          B

          C
        D


Here’s How to Crack It
The question asks for the value of the tangent of an angle. Use the Geometry
Basic Approach: start by drawing triangle ABC.




Next, label what you can. You don’t know the actual side lengths, but because

cos (B) =     , you do know the relationship between the side adjacent to

angle B and the hypotenuse. You can plug in for this relationship: make BC
(the side adjacent to the angle) 12 and AB (the hypotenuse) 13:




You need to find tan (B), which means you need            . You already know

the adjacent side is 12, but you still need the side opposite, AC. Use the
Pythagorean Theorem to find the missing side:

                                a2 + b2 = c2
                               122 + b2 = 132
                                  144 + b2 = 169
                                       b2 = 25
                                         b=5

Therefore, AC = 5, and tan (B) =        , so the correct answer is (B).




                 Your Friend the Rectangle
                 Be on the lookout for questions in which the
                 application of the Pythagorean Theorem is not
                 obvious. For example, every rectangle contains two
                 right triangles. That means that if you know the
                 length and width of the rectangle, you also know the
                 length of the diagonal, which is the hypotenuse of
                 both triangles.


Special Right Triangles
Both of the previous questions you worked also used special right triangles.
While in the last question we used the Pythagorean Theorem to find the
missing side, if you memorize these special triangles, you can avoid using the
Pythagorean Theorem in a lot of cases.

When it comes to geometry questions involving right triangles, the Digital
SAT is often fairly predictable, as questions tend to focus on certain
relationships. In these questions, the triangles have particular ratios. There
are two different types of special right triangles. The first involves the ratio
of sides, and the second involves the ratio of angles.

The most common special right triangles with side ratios are known as
Pythagorean triples. Here are the test-writers’ favorites:
If you memorize these two sets of Pythagorean triples (3-4-5 and 5-12-13),
you’ll often be able to find the answer without using the Pythagorean
Theorem. If you’re given a right triangle with a side of 3 and a hypotenuse of
5, you know right away that the other side has to be 4. Likewise, if you see a
right triangle with sides of 5 and 12, you know the hypotenuse must be 13.

                 Relax; It’s Just a Ratio
                 A 3-4-5 triangle may be hiding, disguised as 6-8-10
                 or 18-24-30. It’s all the same ratio, though, so be on
                 the lookout.


The test-writers also like to use right triangles with sides that are simply
multiples of the common Pythagorean triples. For example, you might see a
6-8-10 or a 10-24-26 triangle. These sides are simply the sides of the 3-4-5
and 5-12-13 triangles multiplied by 2.

There are two types of special right triangles that have a specific ratio of
angles. They are the 30°-60°-90° triangle and the 45°-45°-90° triangle. The
sides of these triangles always have the same fixed ratio to each other. The
ratios are as follows:
                 Don’t Forget the Reference Sheet!
                 The relationships of the sides of special right
                 triangles can be found in the reference sheet in the
                 testing app, so you don’t necessarily need to
                 memorize them. However, you should be able to
                 recognize them.


Let’s talk about a 45°-45°-90° triangle first. Did you notice that this is also
an isosceles right triangle? The legs will always be the same length. And the
hypotenuse will always be the length of one leg times      . Its ratio of side to
side to hypotenuse is always 1:1: . For example, if you have a 45°-45°-90°
triangle with a leg length of 3, then the second leg length will also be 3 and
the hypotenuse will be       .

Now let’s talk about a 30°-60°-90° triangle. The ratio of shorter leg to longer
leg to hypotenuse is always 1: :2. For example, if the shorter leg of a
30°-60°-90° triangle is 5, then the longer leg would be                 and the
hypotenuse would be 10.

Similar and Congruent Triangles
Similar triangles have the same shape, but they are not necessarily the same
size. Having the same shape means that the angles of the triangles are
identical and that the corresponding sides have the same ratio. Look at the
following two similar triangles:
These two triangles both have the same set of angles, but they aren’t the same

size. Whenever this is true, the sides of one triangle are proportional to those
of the other. Notice that sides NO and ST are both opposite the angle that is
a°. These are called corresponding sides, because they correspond to the

same angle. So the lengths of        and      are proportional to each other. In
order to figure out the lengths of the other sides, set up a proportion:

            . Now fill in the information that you know:                  . Cross-

multiply and you find that x = 21. You could also figure out the length of y:
           . Therefore,         , and y = 27. Whenever you have to deal with

sides of similar triangles, just set up a proportion.

Once in a while, a Digital SAT question will ask about what information is
necessary in determining that two triangles are similar. These questions
usually focus on angles, but it’s important to know how both angles and sides
can play a role. For two triangles to be similar, you need one of these
relationships:


        Two triangles are similar when at least one of the following
        is true:

             All three angles of the triangles are congruent (AAA).
             Pairs of sides of the triangles are in proportion, and the
             angle in between those sides is congruent (SAS).
             All three sides of one triangle are in proportion to the
             corresponding three sides of the other triangle (SSS).
In the previous example, there was enough information about triangles MNO
and RST to use the AAA rule but not the SAS rule or the SSS rule.

You might also be asked about the information needed to prove that two
triangles are congruent. Here are the rules for that:


       Two triangles are congruent when at least one of the
       following is true:

            All three sides are equal (SSS).
            Two pairs of angles and the side between them are equal
            (ASA).
            Two pairs of sides and the angle between them are equal
            (SAS).
            Two pairs of angles and a side that isn’t between them
            are equal (AAS).



                 Similar or Congruent?
                 All congruent triangles are similar.

                 Not all similar triangles are congruent.

                 AAA proves that triangles are similar but not
                 necessarily congruent.


That’s a lot, isn’t it? The good news is that these topics aren’t tested very
often, so if they aren’t in your POOD, you’ll be okay. Here’s a question that
will help you review these concepts.




  6.    Mark for Review
     In triangles PQR and WXY, angles Q and X each measure 101° and
     angles R and Y each measure 37°. This information is sufficient to
     prove which of the following?

      I. Triangles PQR and WXY are similar.
     II. Triangles PQR and WXY are congruent.

        A Neither I nor II

        B I only

        C II only

        D I and II


Here’s How to Crack It
The question asks what can be proven about two triangles using the given
information. Eliminate (C) immediately because it is impossible for a
triangle to be congruent without also being similar. The information in the
question is about angles only, and at least one pair of corresponding sides
must be the same length for triangles to be congruent. There is not sufficient
information to determine whether the triangles are congruent; eliminate (D).
Since all triangles have 180 degrees and the triangles have two equal angles,
the third angles must also equal each other. All three angles are congruent,
which matches the AAA rule for similar triangles, so the information is
sufficient to prove that the triangles are similar; eliminate (A). The correct
answer is (B).



Similar Triangles and Trig
Finally, there’s a special relationship between similar triangles and
trigonometry. Side lengths in similar triangles are proportional, and the
trigonometric functions give the proportions of the sides of a triangle.
Therefore, if two triangles are similar, the corresponding trigonometric
functions are equal! Let’s look at how this might work in a question.




  7.      Mark for Review




       In the figure above, triangle ABC is similar to triangle XYZ. What is the
       value of cos(A)?

          A


          B

          C

          D2


Here’s How to Crack It
The question asks for the value of cos (A) but gives measurements on triangle
XYZ. Because the two triangles are similar, the value of corresponding
trigonometric functions will be equal. Therefore, cos (A) = cos (X). The
value of cos X is                  or      . You could use the Pythagorean

Theorem to find XY, but it’s easier to use the special right triangle discussed
earlier. Because the hypotenuse is twice one of the legs, you know this is a
30°-60°-90° triangle. YZ is the shortest side (x), so XY is            or        .

Therefore, cos (X) =      , which reduces to      . Because cos (X) = cos (A),

cos (A) also equals    . The correct answer is (B).




CIRCLES
Here are the rules you’ll need in order to tackle circle questions on the
Digital SAT.

   1. The circumference of a circle is 2πr or πd, where r is the radius of
      the circle and d is the diameter.
      This information is in the reference sheet, so don’t stress over
      memorizing these formulas. You will always be able to open the
      reference sheet in the testing app if you forget them. Just keep in mind
      that the diameter is always twice the length of the radius (and that the
      radius is half the diameter).
    circumference = 2 × π × 5 = 10π                     circumference = 10π

              A Few Formulas
              Area = πr 2
              Circumference = 2πr or πd
              Diameter = 2r


  In math class you probably learned that π = 3.14 (or even 3.14159). On
  the Digital SAT, π = 3+ (a little more than 3) is a good enough
  approximation. Even with a calculator, using π = 3 will give you all the
  information you need to solve difficult Digital SAT multiple-choice
  geometry questions.




                        circumference = about 30

              Leave That π Alone!
              Most of the time, you won’t multiply π out in circle
              questions. Because the answer choices will usually
              be in terms of π (6π instead of 18.849…), you can
              save yourself some trouble by leaving your work in
              terms of π.


2. The area of a circle is πr2, where r is the radius of the circle.
                               area = π(4)2 = 16π

   3. A tangent is a line that touches a circle at exactly one point. A
      radius drawn from that tangent point forms a 90° angle with the
      tangent.




                Circles Have Names?
                If a question refers to Circle R, it means that the
                center of the circle is point R.


Let’s see how these rules can show up on the Digital SAT.




  8.    Mark for Review
      The circle defined by the equation (x – 4)2 + (y – 4)2 = 25 has its center
      at point (4, 4) and includes point (7, 8) on the circle. This is shown in
      the figure above. What is the area of the circle shown?

         A 5π

         B 10π

         C 16π

         D 25π


Here’s How to Crack It
The question asks for the area of the circle, so write down the formula for
area of a circle: A = πr2. That means you need to determine the radius of the
circle. If you remember the circle formula from Chapter 23, you simply need
to recall that r2 = 25 and multiply by π to find the area. If not, you can find the
distance between (4, 4) and (7, 8) by drawing a right triangle. The triangle is
a 3-4-5 right triangle, so the distance between (4, 4) and (7, 8) (and thus the
radius) is 5. If the radius is 5, then the area is π(5)2, or 25π. The correct
answer is (D).
Converting Degrees to Radians
Some geometry questions will ask you to convert an angle measurement from
degrees to radians. While this may sound scary, doing this conversion only
requires that you remember that 180° = π radians. Use this relationship,
which is included on the reference sheet, to set up a proportion and convert
the units.




  9.      Mark for Review

       An angle in a circle measures   radians. What is the measure of the

       angle in degrees?




Here’s How to Crack It
The question asks for the measure of an angle in degrees. Use the relationship
between radians and degrees to set up a proportion. If 180° = π radians, the
proportion will look like this:




Cross-multiply to get                     . Simplify the right side of the

equation to get πx = 30π, then divide both sides of the equation by π to get x
= 30. The correct answer is 30.
Arcs and Sectors
Many circle questions on the Digital SAT will not ask about the whole circle.
Rather, you’ll be asked about arcs or sectors. Both arcs and sectors are
portions of a circle: arcs are portions of the circumference, and sectors are
portions of the area. Luckily, both arcs and sectors have the same
relationship with the circle, based on the central angle (the angle at the center
of the circle that creates the arc or sector):




Note that these relationships are all proportions. Arcs and sectors are
proportional to the circumference and area, respectively, as the central angle
is to 360°.

Questions sometimes refer to “minor” or “major” arcs or sectors. A minor
arc or sector is one that has a central angle of less than 180°, whereas a
major arc or sector has a central angle greater than 180° (in other words, it
goes the long way around the circle). Let’s see how arcs and sectors might
show up in a question.




 10.      Mark for Review
       Points A and B lie on circle O (not shown). AO = 3 and angle O = 120°.
       What is the area of minor sector AOB?

         A

         Bπ

         C 3π
         D 9π


Here’s How to Crack It
The question asks for the area of minor sector AOB in circle O. Because O is
the name of the circle, it’s also the center of the circle, so AO is the radius.
Angle O is the central angle of sector AOB, so you have all the pieces you
need to find the sector. Put them into a proportion:




Cross-multiply to get 360x = 1,080π (remember to not multiply out p).
Divide both sides by 360, and you get x = 3π. The correct answer is (C).



Relationship Between Arc and Angle in Radians
Sometimes you’ll be asked for an arc length, but you’ll be given the angle in
radians instead of degrees. Fear not! Rather than making the question more
complicated, the test-writers have actually given you a gift! All you need to
do is memorize this formula:


                                      s = rθ


In this formula, s is the arc length, r is the radius, and θ is the central angle in
radians. If you know this formula, these questions will be a snap!

When an arc measure is given in degrees, it’s even simpler: the arc is the
same number of degrees as the angle that defines it.
                 Little Boxes
                 Here’s a progression of quadrilaterals from least
                 specific to most specific:
                 quadrilateral is any 4-sided figure
                 ↓
                 parallelogram is a quadrilateral in which opposite
                 sides are parallel
                 ↓
                 rectangle is a parallelogram in which all angles = 90°
                 ↓
                 square is a rectangle in which all sides are equal



RECTANGLES AND SQUARES
Here are some rules you’ll need to know about rectangles and squares:

   1. The perimeter of a rectangle is the sum of the lengths of its sides.
      Just add them up.




                       perimeter = 10 + 4 + 10 + 4 = 28

   2. The area of a rectangle is length × width.
      The area of the preceding rectangle, therefore, is 10 × 4, or 40.

   3. A square is a rectangle whose four sides are all equal in length.
      The perimeter of a square, therefore, is four times the length of any
      side. The area is the length of any side squared.
                              perimeter = 4(3) = 12
                                  area = 32 = 9

   4. In rectangles and squares all angles are 90° angles.
      It can’t be a square or a rectangle unless all angles are 90°.

Let’s check out an example.




 11.      Mark for Review
       If the perimeter of a square is 28, what is the length of the diagonal of
       the square?

          A

          B

          C

          D 14


Here’s How to Crack It
The question asks for the diagonal of a square based on its perimeter. The
perimeter of a square is 4s. So, 28 = 4s. Divide by 4 to find s = 7. The
diagonal of a square divides the square into two 45°-45°-90° triangles, with
sides in the ratio of x:x: . If the side is 7, the diagonal is . The correct
answer is (B).




VOLUME
Volume questions on the Digital SAT can seem intimidating at times. The test-
writers love to give you questions featuring unusual shapes such as pyramids
and spheres. Luckily, the reference sheet in the testing app contains all the
formulas you will ever need for volume questions on the Digital SAT. Simply
apply the Basic Approach for geometry using the given formulas and you’ll
be in good shape (pun entirely intended)!

Let’s look at an example.




 12.      Mark for Review
       A sphere has a volume of 36π. What is the surface area of the sphere?
       (The surface area of a sphere is given by the formula A = 4πr2.)

         A 3π

         B 9π

         C 27π

         D 36π


Here’s How to Crack It
The question asks for the surface area of a sphere given its volume. Start by
writing down the formula for volume of a sphere from the reference sheet:

         . Put what you know into the equation:               . From this you

can solve for r. Divide both sides by π to get          . Multiply both sides

by 3 to clear the fraction: 36(3) = 4r3. Note we left 36 as 36, because the

next step is to divide both sides by 4, and 36 divided by 4 is 9, so 9(3) = r3
or 27 = r3. Take the cube root of both sides to get r = 3. Now that you have
the radius, use the formula provided to find the surface area: A = 4π(3)2,
which comes out to 36π. The correct answer is (D).




BALLPARKING
You may be thinking, “Wait a second, isn’t there an easier way?” By now,
you should know that of course there is, and we’re going to show you. On
many Digital SAT geometry questions, you won’t have to calculate an exact
answer. Instead, you can estimate an answer choice. We call this
Ballparking, a strategy mentioned earlier in this book.

Ballparking is extremely useful on Digital SAT geometry questions. At the
very least, it will help you avoid careless mistakes by immediately
eliminating answers that could not possibly be correct. On many questions,
Ballparking will allow you to find the answer without even working out the
problem at all.
                 Rocket Science?
                 The SAT is a college admissions test, not an
                 exercise in precision. Because approximately 33 of
                 its 44 Math questions are multiple-choice, you can
                 afford to approximate numbers like π,   , and

                 (3+, 1.4, and 1.7+, respectively).



For example, on many Digital SAT geometry questions, you will be
presented with a drawing in which some information is given and you will be
asked to find some of the information that is missing. In most such questions,
you’re expected to apply some formula or perform some calculation, often an
algebraic one. But look at the drawing and make a rough estimate of the
answer (based on the given information) before you try to work it out. You
might be able to eliminate an answer choice or two or even narrow it down
to one.

The basic principles you just learned (such as the number of degrees in a
triangle and the fact that π ≈ 3) will be enormously helpful to you in
ballparking on the Digital SAT.

Even though many geometric figures are marked with a note that they are not
drawn to scale, you will also find it very helpful if you have a good sense of
how large certain common angles are. Study the following examples.
How High Is the Ceiling?
If your friend stood next to a wall in your living room and asked you how
high the ceiling was, what would you do? Would you get out your
trigonometry textbook and try to triangulate using the shadow cast by your
pal? Of course not. You’d look at your friend and think something like this:
“Dave’s about 6 feet tall. The ceiling’s a couple of feet higher than he is. It
must be about 8 feet high.”

Your Ballpark answer wouldn’t be exact, but it would be close. If someone
later claimed that the ceiling in the living room was 15 feet high, you’d be
able to tell her with confidence that she was mistaken.

You’ll be able to do the same thing on the Digital SAT. If line segment A has
a length of π and line segment B is exactly half as long, then the length of line
segment B is a little more than 1.5. All such questions are ideal for
Ballparking.
                  The Correct Choice
                  Remember that the Digital SAT is a mostly multiple-
                  choice test. This means that you don’t always have
                  to come up with an answer; you just have to identify
                  the correct one from among the four choices
                  provided.



PLUGGING IN
As you learned already, Plugging In is a powerful technique for solving
Digital SAT algebra questions. It is also very useful on geometry problems.
For some questions, you will be able to plug in values for missing
information and then use the results either to find the answer directly or to
eliminate answers that cannot be correct.

Here’s an example.




 13.      Mark for Review
       The base of triangle T is 40 percent less than the length of rectangle R.
       The height of triangle T is 50 percent greater than the width of rectangle
       R. The area of triangle T is what percent of the area of rectangle R?

          A 10

          B 45

          C 90

          D 110
                                Watch Us Crack It



Here’s How to Crack It
The question asks for the relationship between the areas of triangle T and
rectangle R. This is a challenging question. Don’t worry—you’ll still be able
to find the right answer by sketching and plugging in.

When plugging in, always use numbers that are easy to work with. Say the
length of the rectangle is 10; that means that the base of the triangle, which is
40 percent smaller, is 6. If you plug 4 in for the width of rectangle R, the
height of triangle T is 6. You should come up with two sketches that look like
this:




T has an area of      , or 18. R has an area of 40. Now set up the translation:

              , where x represents what percent the triangle is of the

rectangle.

Solve for x and you get 45. The correct answer is (B).
Drill 1: Geometry
Answers and explanations can be found starting on this page.

  1.      Mark for Review
       If a rectangular swimming pool has a volume of 16,500 cubic feet, a
       uniform depth of 10 feet, and a length of 75 feet, what is the width of
       the pool, in feet?

          A 22

          B 26

          C 32

          D 110


  2.      Mark for Review




       In the figure above, AE is parallel to BD. what is the length of BD?

          A8

          B9

          C 12
        D 15


3.      Mark for Review




     In the quadrilateral above, the ratio of side length AD to BC is 5 to 7. If
     the length of AD is decreased by 1, how must the length of BC change to
     maintain this ratio?

        A It must decrease by 1 unit.

        B It must increase by 1 unit.

        C It must decrease by 1.4 units.

        D It must increase by 1.4 units.


4.      Mark for Review
     Cube X has a side length 22 times the side length of cube Y. How many
     times greater is the volume of cube X than that of cube Y?
5.      Mark for Review
     In right triangle ABC, angle A is a right angle, AB = x, and BC = y. The
     value of AC can be represented by which of the following expressions?

        A

        B

        C

        D y–x


6.      Mark for Review

     A pyramid has a height of 4 centimeters (cm) and a regular hexagonal

     base with an area of 15 cm2. If the pyramid has a mass of 21.129 grams
     (g), what is the density of the pyramid in    ?

        A 1.06

        B 1.18

        C 2.09

        D 6.51
Drill 2: Trigonometry
Answers and explanations can be found on this page.

  1.      Mark for Review




       In the figure above, circle O has a radius of 8, and angle XOY measures
             radians. What is the measure of minor arc XY?

         A

         B

         C 5π

         D 16π


  2.      Mark for Review
     What is the value of tan(Z)?

        A


        B


        C


        D


3.      Mark for Review




     In the figure above, sin a = x. What is the value of cos b?
       Ax

       B

       C

       D


4.      Mark for Review




     Martin wants to know how tall a certain flagpole is. Martin walks 10
     meters from the flagpole, lies on the ground, and measures an angle of
     70° from the ground to the base of the ball at the top of the flagpole.
     Approximately how tall, in meters, is the flagpole from the ground to
     the base of the ball at the top of the flagpole?

       A 3 meters

       B 9 meters

       C 27 meters
D 29 meters
CHAPTER DRILL ANSWERS AND
EXPLANATIONS
Drill 1: Geometry
1.   A

     The question asks for the width of the pool. For this question, you need
     to know that volume equals length width height. You know that the
     volume is 16,500, the depth (or height) is 10, and the length is 75. Just
     put those numbers into the formula: 16,500 = 75 w 10. Use your
     calculator to solve for w, which equals 22. The correct answer is (A).

2.   C

     The question asks for a value in a geometric figure. Use the Geometry
     Basic Approach. Start by redrawing the figure on the scratch paper.
     Split the figure into two triangles to make things clearer: triangle ACE
     and triangle BCD. Next, label the figure with the given information. The
     only new information is that AE is parallel to BD. Use the knowledge
     that parallel lines cut by a third line create big and small angles, and
     label angles A and B as congruent and angles D and E as congruent.
     Triangles ACE and BCD have the same angle C, which means they have

     three congruent angles and are similar triangles. The sides of similar
     triangles have an equivalent ratio, so set up a proportion. First, add CD
     to DE to get the length of CE: 10 + 15 = 25. Now use the ratio of CD to

     CE to find the ratio of BD to AE. The proportion is          . Cross-

     multiply to get (25)(x) = (10)(30), which becomes 25x = 300. Divide
     both sides of the equation by 25 to get x = 12. The correct answer is
     (C).

3.   C

     The question asks for the change in a value given a proportion. Use the
     Geometry Basic Approach. Start by redrawing the figure on the scratch
     paper. Next, label the figure with information from the question. Since
     no specific numbers are given, only a ratio, plug in. Label AD as 5 and
     BC as 7. Draw the figure a second time and label it based on the change
     described in the question. Since AD is decreased by 1, label AD on the

     second figure as 4. Since AD decreased and the ratio stays the same,
     BC must also decrease. Eliminate (B) and (D) because they would both
     make BC longer. To find the new length of BC, set up a proportion for

            :   . Cross-multiply to get (7)(4) = (5)(x), which becomes 28 =

     5x. Divide both sides of the equation by 5 to get x = 5.6. Since the
     original length of BC was 7, the change is 7 – 5.6 = 1.4. Eliminate (A)

     because it gives the wrong value for the decrease. The correct answer
     is (C).
4.   10648

     The question asks for the relationship between the volumes of two

     geometric figures. Use the Geometry Basic Approach. Draw two cubes
     —or at least two squares to represent one face of each cube—on the
     scratch paper. Next, label the figure with the given information. No
     specific values are given, so plug in and label the side length of cube Y
     as 2. Since the side length of cube X is 22 times that of cube Y, label
     the side length of cube X as 44. The reference sheet doesn’t give the
     formula for the volume of a cube, but it does give the volume of a
     rectangular solid: V = lwh. All three sides of a cube are the same
     length, so the formula becomes V = s3. Plug in the two side lengths to
     determine the volume of each cube. The volume of cube Y becomes V =
     23, or V = 8. The volume of cube X becomes V = 443, or V = 85,184.

     To answer the final question, divide the volume of cube X by the

     volume of cube Y to get                   . Leave out the comma when

     entering the answer in the fill-in box. The correct answer is 10648.

5.   B

     The question asks for an expression that represents a value in a
     geometric figure. Use the Geometry Basic Approach. Start by drawing
     a triangle on the scratch paper with a right angle at A. Next, label the
     figure with the information given. No specific values are given, so plug
     in. To make things easier, use one of the Pythagorean triples and make it
     a 3-4-5 right triangle. The drawing should look something like this:




     Write down x = 3 and y = 5 to keep track of which variable has which
     value. The question asks for AC, which is 4. This is the target value;
     write it down and circle it. Now plug x = 3 and y = 5 into the answer
     choices and eliminate any that do not match the target value. Choice (A)
     becomes             . This does not match the target value of 4, so
     eliminate (A). Choice (B) becomes                                . This
     matches the target, so keep (B) but check the remaining answers just in
     case. Choice (C) becomes                              ; eliminate (C).
     Choice (D) becomes 5 – 3 = 2; eliminate (D). The correct answer is
     (B).

6.   A

     The question asks for the density of a geometric figure. Start by
     determining the volume of the pyramid. Look up the formula for the
     volume of a right regular pyramid in the reference sheet and write it
     down:            . The base of a pyramid is the length times the width—
     or the area of the base—and the area of the base is given as 15 cm2, so
     plug in 15 cm2 for lw. Also plug in 4 cm for h. The formula becomes

                            , or V = 20 cm3. Next, use the units to figure out

     how to solve for the density. Since density is in     , the mass is in g,

     and the volume is in cm3, density must be mass divided by volume.
     This happens to be the formula for density, which can be written as

           . Plug in m = 21.129 and V = 20 to get               , or D =

     1.05645. This rounds to 1.06, which is an answer choice. The correct
     answer is (A).

Drill 2: Trigonometry
1.   B

     The question asks for the measure of minor arc XY. Since the question
     gives you the measure of the central angle in radians, you can use the
     formula s = rθ to find the arc length:                   , which reduces

     to    . The correct answer is (B).

2.   C

     The question asks for the tangent of an angle, which is defined as
             . The side opposite angle Z is 7, and the side adjacent to this

     angle Z is 8, so tan(Z) = . The correct answer is (C).
3.   A

     The question asks for the value of cos b. You can plug in when you’re

     dealing with a geometry question with unknowns. When you’re
     plugging in for a right triangle, use one of the special right triangles to
     make your life easier. Use a 3-4-5 right triangle. Make the side
     opposite a 3, the side adjacent to a 4, and the hypotenuse 5. Because

     sine is             ,         , so       . Cosine is             , so

               . This is your target; circle it. Make       in each answer

     choice and look for the answer that equals . Only (A) works, so the

     correct answer is (A).

4.   C

     The question asks how tall the flagpole is. Use SOHCAHTOA and your
     calculator to find the height of the flagpole. From the 70° angle, you
     know the adjacent side of the triangle, and you want to find the opposite

     side, so you need to use tangent. Tangent              , so tan 70°           ,

     where x is the height of the flagpole up to the ball. Isolate x by
     multiplying both sides by 10: 10 tan 70° = x. Use your calculator to find
     that 10 tan 70° = 27.47, which is closest to 27. The correct answer is
     (C).
Summary
 Degrees and angles
    A circle contains 360°.
    When you think about angles, remember circles.
    A line is a 180° angle.
    When two lines intersect, four angles are formed; the sum of their
    measures is 360°.
    When two parallel lines are cut by a third line, the small angles are
    equal, the big angles are equal, and the sum of a big angle and a
    small angle is 180°.

 Triangles
     Every triangle contains 180°.
     An isosceles triangle is one in which two of the sides are equal in
     length, and the two angles opposite the equal sides are equal in
     measure.
     An equilateral triangle is one in which all three sides are equal in
     length, and all three angles are equal in measure (60°).
     The area of a triangle is     .
     The height of a triangle must form a right angle with the base.
     The Pythagorean Theorem states that in a right triangle, the square of
     the hypotenuse equals the sum of the squares of the two legs.
     Remember the test-writers’ favorite Pythagorean triples (3-4-5 and
     5-12-13).
     Remember the other special right triangles: 45°-45°-90° and
     30°-60°-90°.
     Similar triangles have the same angles, and their lengths are in
     proportion.
     Congruent triangles have the same angles and their side lengths are
     exactly the same.
     For trigonometry questions, remember SOHCAHTOA:
Circles
    The circumference of a circle is 2πr or πd, where r is the radius of
    the circle and d is the diameter.
    The area of a circle is πr2, where r is the radius of the circle.
    A tangent touches a circle at one point; any radius that touches that
    tangent forms a 90° angle with the tangent.
    Arcs are proportional to the circumference based on the central
    angle:                           .

    Sectors are proportional to the area based on the central angle:
                               .

    If the central angle is given in radians, the measure of the arc is
    given by s = rθ.

Rectangles and squares
   The perimeter of a rectangle is the sum of the lengths of its sides.
   The area of a rectangle is length × width.
   A square is a rectangle whose four sides are all equal in length.
   The volume of a rectangular solid is length × width × height. The
   formulas to compute the volumes of other three-dimensional figures
   are supplied in the reference sheet that can be opened at any time in
   the testing app.

When you encounter a geometry question on the Digital SAT, ballpark
the answer before trying to work it out.
Always draw the figure on your scratch paper.

When information is missing from a diagram, ballpark or plug in.
Chapter 26
Fill-Ins
On the Digital SAT, approximately 11 of the 44 Math questions will require
you to produce your own answer. Although the format of these questions is
different from that of the multiple-choice questions, the mathematical
concepts tested aren’t all that different. In this chapter, we’ll show you how
to apply what you have learned in the previous chapters to answering fill-in
questions.
WHAT IS A FILL-IN?
Both Math modules on the Digital SAT have several questions without
answer choices. The exact breakdown per module varies, but you can expect
to see about 11 total questions in this format. The test-writers call these
Student-Produced Response questions, but we’re going to keep things simple
and call them fill-ins.

Despite the different format, many of the techniques that you’ve learned so
far still apply to fill-in questions. You can’t use Process of Elimination or
PITA, of course, but you can still use Plugging In, Bite-Sized Pieces, and
other great techniques. Your calculator will still help you out on many of
these questions, as well.

The only difficulty with fill-ins is getting used to the way in which you are
asked to answer the question. For each fill-in question, you will have a box
like this:




To enter your answer, click inside the box and start typing. The numbers you
enter will automatically appear left to right, and the testing app will show a
preview of your answer so you can make sure it looks right.
                 Different Format, Same Content
                 Fill-in questions test the same math topics as
                 multiple-choice questions:
                    Algebra
                    Advanced Math
                    Problem Solving and Data Analysis
                    Geometry and Trig



THE INSTRUCTIONS
The fill-in instructions will appear on the left side of the screen for every
fill-in question. There are buttons in the middle of the screen that look like
this:




You can use the buttons to make the instructions on the left and the question
on the right take up more or less of the screen. The instructions and examples
in the testing app look like those on the next page.

Student-produced response directions

    If you find more than one correct answer, enter only one answer.
    You can enter up to 5 characters for a positive answer and up to 6
    characters (including the negative sign) for a negative answer.
    If your answer is a fraction that doesn’t fit in the provided space, enter
    the decimal equivalent.
    If your answer is a decimal that doesn’t fit in the provided space, enter it
    by truncating or rounding at the fourth digit.

    If your answer is a mixed number (such as 3 ), enter it as an improper

    fraction (7/2) or its decimal equivalent (3.5).

    Don’t enter symbols such as a percent sign, comma, or dollar sign.


                                Examples
        Answer               Acceptable ways to         Unacceptable: will
                                enter answer            NOT receive credit

                                      3.5                       31/2
           3.5                        3.50                      3 1/2
                                     7/2

                                     2/3                        0.66
                                     .6666                      .66
                                     .6667                      0.67
                                     0.666                      .67
                                     0.667

                                     –1/3                       –.33
                                     –.3333                     –0.33
                                     –0.333


You don’t want to have to spend time rereading the instructions every time,
so make sure you know them well. Here is all the information you need to
know about entering a fill-in answer:

   1. There is space to enter 5 characters if the answer is positive and 6
      characters—including the negative sign—if the answer is negative.

   2. You do not need to type the comma for numbers longer than three digits,
      such as 4,200. In fact, the testing app will not allow it.

   3. The testing app also will not allow symbols such as %, $, or π. Square
      roots, units, and variables cannot be entered.

   4. You can enter your answer as either a fraction or a decimal. For
      example, .5, 0.5, and 1/2 are all acceptable answers. Use the forward
      slash for fractions.

   5. If your answer is a fraction, it must fit within the space. Do not try to

     enter something like        as a fraction: either reduce it or convert it to a

     decimal. Entering 20/50, 2/5, .4, and 0.4 would all count as the correct
     answer.

   6. Fractions do not need to be in the lowest reduced form. As long as it
      fits, it’s fine.

   7. You cannot fill in mixed numbers. Convert all mixed numbers to

     improper fractions or decimals. If your answer is         , you must convert

     it to 5/2 or 2.5. If you enter 21/2, the testing app will read your answer

     as    .
   8. If your answer is a decimal that will not fit in the space provided,
       either enter as many digits as will fit or round the last digit. The

       fraction      can be entered in decimal form as –0.666, –0.667, –.6666,

       or –.6667.

   9. Some questions will have more than one right answer. Any correct
      answer you enter will count as correct; do not try to enter multiple
      answers.




                    Fill the Space
                    Know what you can and can’t enter into the fill-in box
                       5 characters for a positive answer
                       6 characters for a negative answer
                       Don’t enter extra zeros if the answer is short
                       Do enter as much of a long decimal as will fit
                       Don’t enter a fraction that doesn’t fit
                       Do enter reduced fractions that fit



FILL-INS: A TEST DRIVE
To get a feel for this format, let’s work through two examples. As you will
see, fill-in questions are just regular Digital SAT Math questions.




  1.      Mark for Review
     If a + 2 = 6 and b + 3 = 21, what is the value of ?




Here’s How to Crack It
The question asks for the value of . You need to solve the first equation for

a and the second equation for b. Start with the first equation, and solve for a.
By subtracting 2 from both sides of the equation, you should see that a = 4.

Now move to the second equation, and solve for b. By subtracting 3 from
both sides of the second equation, you should see that b = 18.

The question asked you to find the value of . That’s easy. The value of b is

18, and the value of a is 4. Therefore, the value of   is   .


That’s an odd-looking fraction. How in the world do you fill it in? Ask

yourself this question: “Does     fit?” Yes! Fill in   .




Your math teacher wouldn’t like it, but the scoring computer will. You

shouldn’t waste time reducing       to a prettier fraction or converting it to a

decimal. Spend that time on another question instead. The fewer steps you
take, the less likely you will be to make a careless mistake.
   2.       Mark for Review
         The radius of circle O is 212 times the radius of circle P. If the area of
         circle O is t times the area of circle P, what is the value of t?




Here’s How to Crack It
The question asks for the relationship between the areas of two geometric
figures. It doesn’t matter that this is a fill-in instead of a multiple-choice
question: you still start with the Geometry Basic Approach. Draw two
circles on your scratch paper. Next, label the figure. Mark the center of one
circle as O and the center of the other as P, and draw in the radius of each
circle. The question doesn’t give you any numbers for the radius or area of
circle P, so plug in. Make the radius 2 and label that on the figure. Finally,
write down formulas. The area of a circle is given by A = πr2. Plug in r = 2
to get A = π(2)2, or A = 4π for Circle P.

The question states that the radius of circle O is 212 times the radius of

circle P, so multiply 2 by 212 to get r = (2)(212) = 424. Label the radius of

circle O as 424. Plug r = 424 into the area formula to get A = π(424)2, or A =
179,776π. To solve for t, divide the area of circle O by the area of circle P

to get                  , or t = 44,944. This is a big number! However, it’s still

only 5 characters long, so it will fit in the fill-in box. The fill-in box doesn’t

accept commas, so don’t worry about that. The correct answer is 44944.
MORE POOD
The fill-in questions are mixed in with the multiple-choice questions, and
both math modules have an approximate order of difficulty. More important
than the question order is your Personal Order of Difficulty (POOD), a
strategy that encourages you to focus on the questions you know how to
answer first. Don’t spend too much time on a question you are unsure about,
no matter which format it is.

Keep in mind, of course, that many of the math techniques that you’ve learned
are still very effective on fill-in questions. The Geometry Basic Approach
and Plugging In both worked well on the previous question. If you’re able to
plug in or take an educated guess, go ahead and fill in that answer. As
always, there’s no penalty for getting it wrong.

Here’s another fill-in question that you can answer by using a technique
you’ve learned before.




  3.      Mark for Review
       Town A has 2,200 residents. The mean age of the residents of Town A
       is 34. Town B has 3,680 residents with a mean age of 40. What is the
       mean age of the residents of Town A and Town B combined?




Here’s How to Crack It
The question asks for a mean, or average. Work the question in bite-sized
pieces and start with Town A. For averages, use the formula T = AN, in
which T is the Total, A is the Average, and N is the Number of things. The
question states that Town A has 2,200 residents, so that is the Number of
things. The question also states that the mean age of the residents of Town A
is 34, so that is the Average. Plug these numbers into the average formula to
get T = (34)(2,200), or T = 74,800. Do the same thing for Town B: the
Number of things is 3,680 residents, and the Average is the mean age of 40,
so the formula becomes T = (40)(3,680), or T = 147,200.

Next, add the two totals to get 74,800 + 147,200 = 222,000. This is the Total
for the two towns combined. The Number of things for the two towns
combined is 2,200 + 3,680 = 5,880 residents. Use the average formula one
more time to get 222,000 = (A)(5,880). Divide both sides of the equation by
5,880 to get 37.7551020408 = A.

There clearly isn’t room to enter this answer in the fill-in box, so either cut it
off or round when you run out of room. You can enter 37.75 or 37.76 and get
the question right. Don’t round too much, though: if you enter 37.8, you’ll get
the question wrong. Enter the full five characters to get credit for a positive
answer. The correct answer is 37.75 or 37.76.

                                       or




Careless Mistakes
On fill-in questions, you obviously can’t use POE to get rid of bad answer
choices, and Plugging In the Answers won’t work either. In order to earn
points on fill-in questions, you’re going to have to find the answer yourself,
as well as be extremely careful when you enter your answers in the fill-in
box. If you need to, double-check your work to make sure you have solved
correctly. If you suspect that the question is a difficult one and you get an
answer too easily, you may have made a careless mistake or fallen into a
trap.

Try the example below with this in mind.




   4.      Mark for Review
        A teacher is grading two assignments that each had to be a specific
        length: research papers and short stories. Each research paper has 5
        more pages than each short story. How many pages are in a research
        paper if 7 research papers and 5 short stories have a total of 275
        pages?




Here’s How to Crack It
The question asks for the number of pages in a research paper given other
information about two assignments. Use another skill from earlier in this
book and translate English to math in bite-sized pieces. The question states
that each research paper has 5 more pages than each short story. Let r
represent the number of pages in a research paper. The word has translates to
=. The phrase 5 more than translates to 5 +. Finally, let s represent the
number of pages in a short story. The sentence, therefore, translates to r = 5 +
s. Do the same thing with the information that 7 research papers and 5 short
stories have a total of 275 pages. Use r and s again for the number of pages
in a research paper and a short story, respectively. Translate and as + and
have a total of as =, and the sentence translates to 7r + 5s = 275. You now
have two equations with the same two variables:

                                    r=5+s
                                 7r + 5s = 275

Substitute 5 + s for r in the second equation to get

                              7(5 + s) + 5s = 275

Distribute the 7.

                              35 + 7s + 5s = 275

Combine like terms on the left side, then subtract 35 from both sides.

                                   12s = 240

Isolate s.

                                     s = 20

It’s tempting to fill in 20 and call it a day, but always read the final question!
The question asks for the number of pages in a research paper, not in a short
story. Plug 20 for s into the first equation to solve for r.

                                r = 5 + 20 = 25

Thus, r = 25, so fill in that value. The correct answer is 25.




MULTIPLE CORRECT ANSWERS
As you’ve already seen, some fill-in questions will have more than one
possible correct answer. It won’t matter which correct answer you enter as
long as it really is correct. This happens frequently when the answer is a
fraction or a decimal. It can also happen when there is more than one solution
to an equation.

Let’s look at one of those.




   5.      Mark for Review
        What is one possible solution to the equation |a + 3| = 7?




Here’s How to Crack It
The question asks for a possible solution to an equation with an absolute
value. With an absolute value, the value inside the absolute value bars can be
either positive or negative. Set a + 3 equal to both 7 and –7, and solve both
equations. When a + 3 = 7, subtract 3 from both sides of the equation to get a
= 4. When a + 3 = –7, subtract 3 from both sides of the equation to get a = –
10. Enter either 4 or –10 and you’ll get the question right.

In this case, that was more work than you needed to do. The question asked
for one possible solution, so you could have stopped after finding one value.
However, questions about absolute value might ask for a specific solution—
either the positive solution or the negative solution—so always read the final
question (RTFQ) to make sure you don’t enter a value that isn’t correct.

                                        or
Fill-In Drill
Answers and explanations can be found starting on this page.

  1.      Mark for Review
       If ab = 4, and 3b = 2, what is the value of a?




  2.      Mark for Review

       If 4x + 2y = 24 and        , what is the value of x?




  3.      Mark for Review



       The number of mice in a certain colony is shown by the formula above,
       such that n is the number of mice and t is the time, in months, since the
       start of the colony. If 2 years have passed since the start of the colony,
       how many mice does the colony contain now?




  4.      Mark for Review
     In the figure above, if d is parallel to e, what is the value of y?




5.      Mark for Review
     The function g is defined by g(x) = –(x – 3)(x + 11). For what value of
     x is the value of g(x) at its maximum?




6.      Mark for Review
     If line m is defined by the equation –3x = –2y – 12 and line n is
     parallel to line m, what is the slope of line n?




7.      Mark for Review
     If Alexandra pays $56.65 for a table, and this amount includes a tax of
     3% on the price of the table, what is the amount, in dollars, that she
     pays in tax?
 8.      Mark for Review

      In triangle ABC, where angle A is a right angle, sin(C) is   . What is the

      value of tan(B)?




 9.      Mark for Review

      The kinetic energy (KE) of a ball in motion is given by the equation
                  , where m is the mass of the ball in kilograms (kg) and v is

      the velocity in meters per second       . A ball with a mass of 5 kg and a

      kinetic energy of 18.225 kg         is to be rolled along the ground. What

      is the velocity of the ball in meters per second, assuming there is no
      friction?




10.      Mark for Review

                             x(mx + 42) + 18 = 0

      If the equation above has exactly two real solutions and m is an integer
      constant, what is the greatest possible value of m?
CHAPTER DRILL ANSWERS AND
EXPLANATIONS
Fill-In Drill
1.   8

     The question asks for the value of a. Using 3b = 2, solve for b by

     dividing both sides by 3 to get b = . That means           . Fractional

     exponents tell you to use the denominator as the root and use the

     numerator as a regular exponent. So,          . First, cube both sides to
     find a2 = 43 = 64. Next, take the square root of both sides to find a = 8.
     The correct answer is 8.

2.   3

     The question asks for the value of x in a system of equations. To solve
     for one variable, find a way to make the other variable disappear when
     stacking and adding the equations. Start by dividing both sides of the
     first equation by 2 to get 2x + y = 12. Multiply both sides of the second
     equation by 2x to get 7y = 14x, and then subtract 7y from both sides of
     the equation to get 0 = 14x – 7y. Now divide both sides of the equation
     by 7 to get 0 = 2x – y. The y-terms in the two equations now have the
     same coefficient with opposite signs, so stack and add the equations.
     Divide both sides of the resulting equation by 4 to get x = 3. The
     correct answer is 3.

3.   3072

     The question asks for a value in an equation and gives conflicting units.
     The question states that t is in months and asks about years. There are
     12 months in 1 year, so there are (12)(2) = 24 months in 2 years. Thus, t

     = 24. Plug this value into the given equation to get            , which

     becomes             . Use a calculator to get n = 12(256), or n = 3,072.
     Leave out the comma when entering the answer in the fill-in box. The
     correct answer is 3072.

4.   148

     The question asks for the measure of an angle on a figure. Use the
     Geometry Basic Approach. Start by redrawing the figure on the scratch
     paper, including the labels. There is a triangle in the middle of the
     figure, and all triangles contain 180°. Right angles are 90°, so the third
     angle measures 180° – 90° – 58° = 32°. That angle and angle y make up
     a straight line, and there are 180° in a line, so 32° + y° = 180°. Subtract
     32° from both sides of the equation to get y° = 148°. The fill-in box
     does not allow degree signs, so leave it out. The correct answer is 148.

5.   –4

     The question asks for the value when a quadratic function reaches its
     maximum. A parabola reaches its minimum or maximum value at its
     vertex, so find the x-coordinate of the vertex. One method is to enter the
     equation into a graphing calculator, then scroll and zoom as needed to
     find the vertex. The vertex is at (–4, 49), so the value of the x-
     coordinate is –4. Another way to solve is to recognize that the vertex of

     a parabola is on the axis of symmetry, which is the midpoint between
     the two x-intercepts. Find the x-intercepts by setting each factor equal
     to 0 and solving. When x – 3 = 0, x = 3. When x + 11 = 0, x = –11. The

     x-coordinate of the midpoint is the average of the two x-intercepts,

     which is                       . Using either method, the correct answer

     is –4.


6.     or 1.5


     The question asks for the slope of a line. The question states that line m
     and line n are parallel, which means they have the same slope but

     different y-intercepts. The question gives the equation of line m, so find
     the slope of that line. Rearrange the equation so it is in slope-intercept
     form, y = mx + b, in which m is the slope and b is the y-intercept. Add

     2y to both sides of the equation to get –3x + 2y = –12, then add 3x to
     both sides of the equation to get 2y = 3x – 12. Finally, divide both sides

     of the equation by 2 to get             . The slope of line m is , so the

     slope of line n is also . The answer can be entered as a fraction or in

     decimal form, which is 1.5. The correct answer is       or 1.5.
7.   1.65

     The question asks for a value given a specific situation. Translate the
     information in bite-sized pieces. The question states that Alexandra

     pays $56.65 for a table, which includes a tax of 3% on the price of
     the table. The unknown is the price of the table before tax, so make that

     x. Percent means out of 100, so translate 3% as        . The tax is added

     to the cost before tax, so add those two values and set them equal to the

     total cost of $56.65. The equation becomes                            .

     Simplify the left side of the equation to get x + 0.03x = $56.65, and then
     1.03x = $56.65. Divide both sides of the equation by 1.03 to get x =

     $55.00. This is the cost before tax. The question asks for the amount of
     tax, in dollars, so subtract the cost before tax from the final cost to get
     $56.65 – $55.00 = $1.65. The fill-in box does not allow dollar signs,

     so leave it out. The correct answer is 1.65.


8.      or 6.461 or 6.462

     The question asks for the value of a trigonometric function. Use the
     Geometry Basic Approach. Begin by drawing a right triangle. Next,
     label the vertices and label the right angle as angle A. The drawing
     should look something like this:
     Next, write out SOHCAHTOA to remember the trig functions. The

     SOH part defines the sine as              , and the question states that

                  . Label the side opposite angle C, which is AB, as 13 and

     the hypotenuse, which is BC, as 85. To find the length of the third side,

     use the Pythagorean Theorem: a2 + b2 = c2. Plug in the known values to
     get 132 + b2 = 852. Square the numbers to get 169 + b2 = 7,225, then
     subtract 169 from both sides of the equation to get b2 = 7,056. Take the

     square root of both sides of the equation to get b = 84. With all three
     side lengths labeled, the drawing looks like this:




     To find tan(B), use SOHCAHTOA again. The TOA part defines the
     tangent as          . The side opposite angle B is 84, and the side

     adjacent to angle B is 13, so              . The answer can also be

     entered in the fill-in box as a decimal. In this case,                ,

     which is too long. Either stop when there’s no more room and enter

     6.461 or round the last digit and enter 6.462. The correct answer is

     or equivalent forms.

9.   2.7
   The question asks for a value given an equation. Plug in the values
   given in the question and solve for the other value. The question states
   that the ball has a mass of 5 kg, and that m represents mass, so plug in

   m = 5. The question also states that the kinetic energy is 18.225, and
   that KE represents kinetic energy, so plug in KE = 18.225. The equation

   becomes                      . Multiply both sides of the equation by 2 to

   get 36.45 = (5)(v)2. Divide both sides of the equation by 5 to get 7.29 =

   v2, then take the square root of both sides of the equation to get 2.7 = v.
   The correct answer is 2.7.

10. 24

   The question asks for the value of a constant in a quadratic equation.
   Start by distributing the x on the left side of the equation to get mx2 +
   42x + 18 = 0. The question states that the system has exactly two real
   solutions. To determine the number of solutions to a quadratic, use the
   discriminant. The discriminant is the part of the quadratic formula
   under the square root sign, and it can be written as D = b2 – 4ac. When
   the discriminant is positive, the quadratic has exactly two real
   solutions; when the discriminant is 0, the quadratic has exactly one real
   solution; and when the discriminant is negative, the quadratic has no
   real solutions. Since this quadratic has exactly two real solutions, the
   discriminant must be positive.

   The quadratic is now in standard form, ax2 + bx + c = 0, so a = m, b =
   42, and c = 18. Plug these into the discriminant formula to get D = 422 –
   4(m)(18), which becomes D = 1,764 – 72m. In order for D to be
   positive, the result must be greater than 0, so write the inequality 1,764
– 72m > 0. Add 72m to both sides of the inequality to get 1,764 > 72m,
and then divide both sides of the inequality by 72 to get 24.5 > m. The
question states that m is an integer, so the greatest possible value of m
is 24. The correct answer is 24.
Summary
 Both of the Math modules on the Digital SAT contain several questions
 without answer choices. The test-writers call these questions “student-
 produced responses.” We call them fill-ins because you have to fill in
 your own answer.

 Despite their format, fill-ins are really just like other Math questions on
 the Digital SAT, and many of the same techniques that you have learned
 still apply.

 The fill-in questions and multiple-choice questions are mixed together in
 a loose order of difficulty. Use your knowledge of your own strengths
 and weaknesses to decide which ones to tackle first and which ones, if
 any, to skip.

 The fill-in format increases the likelihood of careless errors. Know the
 instructions and check your work carefully.

 Just like the rest of the Digital SAT, there is no guessing penalty for fill-
 ins, so you should always fill in an answer, even if it’s a guess.

 Enter only one answer even if the question has multiple possible
 answers. It doesn’t matter which answer you enter, as long as it’s one of
 the possible answers.

 Enter up to 5 characters when the answer is positive. Enter up to 6
 characters, including the negative sign, when the answer is negative.

 The characters that can be entered are the digits 0–9, the negative sign,
 the forward slash (/) for fractions, and the decimal point. Special
 characters such as % or π cannot be entered.
If the answer to a fill-in question contains a fraction or decimal, you can
enter the answer in either form. Use whichever form is easier and less
likely to cause mistakes.

If your answer is a fraction that doesn’t fit in the space, either reduce the
fraction or convert it to a decimal.

If a fraction fits in the space, you don’t have to reduce the fraction before
entering it.

Do not enter mixed numbers. Convert mixed numbers to fractions or
decimals before entering your answer.

If your answer is a long or repeating decimal, fill up all of the space.
Either keep entering digits until the space is full or round the last digit
that will fit.
Part IV
Taking the Digital SAT
THE DIGITAL SAT IS A WEEK AWAY—WHAT
SHOULD YOU DO?
First of all, you should practice the techniques we’ve taught you on any
practice test you take. If you haven’t done so already, take and score one or
more of the practice tests in this book and online. You can also download a
practice test from College Board’s website, www.collegeboard.org.

If you want more practice, pick up a copy of our very own 645+ Practice
Questions for the Digital SAT at your local bookstore or through our website
at PrincetonReview.com/bookstore.




                 Perfect Your Skills
                 In addition to taking the practice test in this book, you
                 should register your book (See “Get More (Free)
                 Content” on this page) to gain access to even more
                 practice, as well as other fantastic resources to
                 enhance your prep.



Getting Psyched
The Digital SAT is a big deal, but don’t let it scare you. Sometimes students
get so nervous about doing well that they worry they will freeze up on the test
and ruin their scores. The best thing to do is to think of the Digital SAT as a
game. It’s a game you can get better at, and beating the test can be fun. When
you go into the test center, just think about the advantage you have because
you know how to plug in when you see variables in the answer choices.

The best way to keep from getting nervous is to build confidence in yourself
and in your ability to remember and use our techniques. When you take
practice tests, time yourself exactly as you will be timed on the real Digital
SAT. Develop a sense of how long 35 minutes is, for example, and how much
time you can afford to spend on cracking difficult questions. If you know
ahead of time what to expect, you won’t be as nervous.

Of course, taking a real Digital SAT is much more nerve-racking than taking
a practice test. Prepare yourself ahead of time for the fact that 35 minutes
will seem to go by a lot faster on a real Digital SAT than it did on your
practice tests.

It’s all right to be nervous; the point of being prepared is to keep from
panicking.

Should You Sleep for 36 Hours?
Some guidance counselors tell their students to get a lot of sleep the night
before the Digital SAT. This probably isn’t a good idea. If you aren’t used to
sleeping 12 hours a night, doing so will just make you groggy for the test. The
same goes for going out all night: tired people are not good test-takers.

A much better idea is to get up early each morning for the entire week before
the test and do your homework before school. This will get your brain
accustomed to functioning at that hour of the morning. You want to be sharp at
test time.

Before dinner the night before the test, spend an hour or so reviewing or
doing a few practice problems. The goal here is to brush up on the material,
not to exhaust yourself by over-cramming.
                 Veg Out
                 Although preparation is key to doing well on the test,
                 you shouldn’t exhaust yourself trying to cram
                 information into your head. Take some breaks
                 between study sessions to relax, unwind, and rest
                 your mind.



Furthermore…
Here are a few pointers for test day and beyond:

 1. Eat a good breakfast before the test—your brain needs energy.

 2. Work out a few Digital SAT questions on the morning of the test to help
    dust off any cobwebs in your head and get you started thinking
    analytically.

 3. Arrive at the test center early. Everyone is headed to the same place at
    the same time.

 4. You must take acceptable identification to the test center on the day of
    the test. Acceptable identification must include a recognizable
    photograph and your name. Acceptable forms of ID include your driver’s
    license, a school ID with a photo, or a valid passport. If you don’t have
    an official piece of ID with your signature and your photo, you can have
    your school make an ID for you using a Student ID form provided by
    College Board. Complete instructions for making such an ID are found
    on College Board’s website. According to College Board, the following
    forms of ID are unacceptable: a birth certificate, a credit card, or a
    Social Security card. Make sure you read all of the rules in the Student
    Registration Booklet because conflicts with the College Board are just
  not worth the headache. Your only concern on the day of the test should
  be doing well on the Digital SAT. To avoid hassles and unnecessary
  stress, make absolutely certain that you take your admissions ticket and
  your ID with you on the day of the test.

                   1. Eat Breakfast
                   You’ll work better on a satisfied stomach.
                   2. Try Some Questions
                   Get your mind moving.
                   3. Show Up Early
                   Leave time for traffic.
                   4. Take Your ID
                   A driver’s license, a passport, or a school photo
                   ID will do.


5. If you are taking the Digital SAT on your own laptop or tablet, you will
   need to bring it to the testing center. Make sure it is fully charged, and
   bring a charging cable—but there’s no guarantee you’ll have access to an
   outlet. If you are using a device from the testing center or from College
   Board, leave your smart devices at home. Cell phones are permitted as
   long as they are put away and turned off, but we recommend leaving
   them at home or in a car, if at all possible, because if your phone
   somehow makes a noise or you touch or look at it by accident, you could
   have your test canceled.

                   5. No Extra Technology
                   Only bring a laptop or tablet if you need it for
                   testing. Don’t wear a smartwatch, and leave your
                   phone at home or in the car if possible!


6. The only outside tool you are allowed to use on the test is a calculator.
   The Digital SAT has a built-in calculator for all Math questions, but you
   may be more comfortable with your own calculator. If so, make sure it is
   on the approved calculator list and has fresh batteries before the test.
                    6. Remember Supplies
                    Bring your calculator if you plan to use it, and
                    bring extra batteries just in case.


 7. Some proctors allow students to bring food into the test room; others
    don’t. Take a snack like a banana, which is sure to give you an energy
    boost. Save it until your break and eat it outside the test room.

                    7. Take Fruit or Other Energy Food
                    Grapes or oranges can give you an energy boost
                    if you need it.


 8. You are going to be sitting in the same place for a little over two hours,
    so make sure your desk isn’t broken or unusually uncomfortable. If you
    are left-handed, ask for a left-handed desk. (The center may not have
    one, but it won’t hurt to ask.) If the Sun is in your eyes, ask to move. If
    the room is too dark, ask someone to turn on the lights. Don’t hesitate to
    speak up.

                    8. Your Desk…
                    should be comfortable and suited to your needs.


 9. Make sure to follow all directions from College Board about how to be
    ready to go at testing time. You will have to ensure that your device has
    the testing application and that you can access the test. Tech help will be
    available if you need it.

                    9. Your Testing App…
                    should be functioning properly, but ask for tech
                    help if needed.


10. Make sure to click on an answer for every question. Use the module
    Review tool at any time during the module and again at the end of the
   module to see which questions remain marked, unanswered, or both.

                     10. Click Carefully
                     Make sure to select the correct answer to each
                     question after doing your work. Enter answers to
                     student-produced response questions and verify
                     correct entry with the answer preview.


11. You deserve to take your Digital SAT under good conditions. While you
    are testing, if there is an issue that can be addressed immediately (the
    high school band is practicing outside the window or your chair is
    wobbly), see if you can get the proctor to fix the situation. If not, you can
    report the conditions to College Board, but do all you can to ensure good
    testing conditions while at the testing center.

                     11. We’re Here for You
                     The Princeton Review is proud to advise
                     students who feel their exam was not
                     administered properly.
                   Wat’s next on
                 your reading list?
                 Discover your next
                     great read!

Get personalized book picks and up-to-date news about this
                         author.
                     Sign up now.
